The Center for Muslim Contribution to Civilization
THE
Best Divisions
FOR
Knowledge
OF THE
Regions
Aḥsaa al-Taqāsīm fī Maʿrifat al-Aqālīm Al-Muqaddasī
Translated by Professor Basil Collins Reviewed by Dr Mohammad Hamid Altaʾi
٠rneء
CONTENTS
ix
xi
xiii
xiv xxi
1 9 23 30 34 41 44 46 53 5 9 63 95 115 128 163 183 207 215 218 219 233 239 239 287 303 313
ListofMaps Foreword About this Series
Center for Muslim Contribution to Civilization: Board of Trustees Center for Muslim Contribution to Civilization: Board Preface Introduction
The Best Divisions for Knowledge of the Regions An Account of the Seas and Rivers An Account of Names and their Diversities An Account of the Distinctive Features of the Regions An Account of the Madhahib [Schools of Islamic Law] and the Dhimma [Free Non-Muslim Subjects]
Narrative of my Actual Experiences Report of Places on which Accounts Differ Abridgement for the Use ofJurists
An Account of the Climates of the World and the Position of the Qibla The Empire of Al-Islam The Peninsula of the Arabs The Region of Al-ʿIraq
The Region of Aqūr (Al-Jazīra) [Upper Mesopotamia]
The Region of Al-Sham (Syria)
The Region ofMisr (Egypt)
The Region of the Maghrib (Northern Africa West of Egypt; Andalusia) An Account of the Desert of the Bedouin An Account of the Eight Regions of the Non-Arab Peoples The Region of Al-Mashriq (The Eastern Territories)
The Province of Haytal (Right Bank ofjayhon)
An Account ofthe Jayhūn River and the Settlements on it An Account of the Crossing points and of the Distributaries of the River (Jayhūn)
The Territory of the Khurasan side of the River The Region of Al-Daylam (Lowlands and Highlands ofGīlan)
The Region of Al-Rihab (Adharbayjan--Armenia)
The Region of Al-Jibal ("The Mountains”: wide Mountain area WNW Īran--ENE ʿlraq)
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS

329
344
372
384
394
405
425
an Gulf)؛ttoral Lowlands ofīran at Head of Arab؛on of KhQzis،an (L؛The Reg
The Region of Filrs (Southwest Iriln)
The Region of Kirmiln (Sou،h Central Īriln)
The Region of Al-Sind (Plain of Lower Indus)
The Desert that Lies Among these Regions
Appendix: English keys to the Arabic maps Index
MAPS
Map 1: The Persian Sea	10
Map II: Bahr al-R0m	14
Map III: Al-Kaʿba	54
Map IV: Arabia	65
Map V: Al-ʿIraq	96
Map VI: Al-Jazīra	116
Map VII: Al-Sham	131
Map VIII: Misr	164
Map IX: Al-Maghrib	184
Map X: The Arabian Desert	208
Map XI: Ma waraʾa al-Nahr	220
Map XII: Khurasan	242
Map XIII: Tabar Daylam	288
Map XIV: Adharbayjan	304
Map XV: Jibal Al-Daylam	314
Map XVI: Khūzistan	331
Map XVII: Fars	345
Map XVIII: Kirman	373
Map XIX: Al-Sind	385
Map XX: The Persian Desert	395
Appendix: English keys to the Arabic maps	405
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
p. I IN THE NAME OF GOD THE MOST BENIGNANT, THE MERCIFUL: FACILITATE MY TASK, AND HELP ME BY YOUR GRACIOUSNESS, 0 MUNIFICENT lord!
Praise be to God who created the world: He foreordained it, then moulded its shape, bringing to perfection the work of creation (Qurʾān, sora 25, v. 2), without a counselor to help Him. He arranged it without a helper, and to what perfection unaided, He brought it! He established it firmly without assistance from anyone. He pegged the world down with towering mountains so that it should not be moved (Qurʾān, sora 16, v. 15; sora 78, v. 7); and He surrounded it with the sea so that its waters might not rise up and overwhelm it. He scattered His servants over it so He could see how they would conduct themselves: some of them believed, and took the correct way, but some did not believe, and turned away. May God abundantly put His blessing on the best of the creation, and the most noble of men, Muhammad, and on his family and his Companions, and may He grant them salvation!
Abu ʿAbd Allah Muhammad bin Ahmad al-Muqaddasl has said: “The scholars have always desired to compose works so that their traces may not vanish from this earth, and their fame not pass away." It has been my wish to follow their established practices, to walk in their footsteps, and put in order a science which will give life to my memory, and which will be of service to mankind, so that I may be pleasing to my Lord. Now, I have found that the scholars who formerly dealt with the sciences wrote the initial works: then their successors in turn commented on and summarized their works. Accordingly, it occurred to me to direct my attention to a science which they had neglected, and to specialize in a branch of learning they had not dealt with, except defectively--I mean an account of the Islamic regions, with the deserts and the seas in them; the lakes and rivers there; a description of their famous metropoles, and noted settlements: the way stations that are well used and the roads that are frequented. I will state in my account the ingredients of their medicaments and drugs, the sources and cargoes of commerce; the diversity of the peoples of the countries in their expressions, intonations, languages, complexions; their doctrinal schools, their measures, their weights, their coins, large and small; with particulars of p. 2 their food and drink, their fruits and waters; a recounting of what is to their credit and discredit; their trade in export and import. Mention is also made of the places of danger in the deserts, and the number of way stations in the intervals between settlements. There will be mention of the saltpans, the rocky deserts, and those of sand; the hills, the plains, the mountains; the limestones
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
2
and the red sandstones: the soils rich and poor; the lands of profusion and fertility: the places of scarcity and barrenness. There will be mention of the places of veneration, and of the watchposts, the specialties of the countries, the usages of the inhabitants: the countries, the boundaries, the cold areas, and the hot areas; the Yamanl land divisions, Kurdish land divisions, areas surveyed for the assessment of taxes, and the frontiers; the handiworks and the learned pursuits; the fields watered solely by rain, also the wooded areas; the places of sacrifice and ceremonies of the Pilgrimage.
I realized that this is a work travelers and merchants cannot do without, and that it is indispensable for devout and upright people; it has been desired by kings and nobility;	and jurists have sought it: commoners and elite delight
in it: every traveler may use it to advantage, and every merchant may profit by it.
I could not complete the compilation of it until after my travels throughout the countries, and my visiting the regions of Islām; until after I had met the learned, and been of service to princes, had meetings with the Qādhīs, and studied under the jurists; had frequented the society of men of letters, the Readers of the Qurʾān, and writers of the traditions; had associated with ascetics and the Sūfīs; been present at the assemblies of the tellers of stories, and of public preachers, all this while engaging in trade everywhere, and associating with all the people I encountered.
I paid careful attention to the elements of my science until I was familiar with
hem, and to the measurements of the regions in farsakhs [originally a measure
ofdistance over time: 4 km./hr. on foot, 6 km. for cavalry; now 6 km. See herein Muq. pp. 58, 59, 65, 66] so that I determined them with precision.
around the frontiers so that I could define them, and traversed the military districts so that I knew them. I made inquiry about the religious sects so that I became familiar with them; and arrived at a knowledge of the languages and complexions of the peoples so that I could classify them. I paid close attention to
the districts so as to categorize them, and I researched the taxes on land so that
I could calculate their amounts; I tasted the air, and I evaluated the water. With all this, I suffered severe privation, and spent lots of money. I sought to practice what is lawful, and avoid what is sinful, while dealing honestly with Muslims so as to please God.
In patience I bore my humble condition and absence from home, and I have p.ذ been mindful of God and apprehensive of Him: all this after I had awakened in my soul a desire to earn some recompence from God, and filled it with the desire for a good reputation, and dread of misdeeds. I have avoided falsehoods and excesses; by arguments I have guarded myself against censure. I did not set down anything so that its meaning would extend beyond what is proper, nor anything inconsistent, listening only to the reports of trustworthy people.
May God grant us His help in what we have aspired to do: may He move us to success in what He desires and approves; for it is He whom we worship, and it is to Him that we return.
3
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
Preliminary and Prerequisi،e Observations
Know that I have built this book on firm foundations and supported it with powerful pillars. I have striven for accuracy with all my might, and have sought the help of the understanding of men of intelligence; and I have besought God-glorious is His name--to have me avoid error and oversight, to enable me to achieve my expectation and my hope, to raise up the pillars of this work, and to fīrmly join its structure with the use ofwhat I have witnessed and understood, learned and noted. Thus have I raised the building, and established its columns and pillars. Among its supports and pillars, moreover, in the establishing of which I sought assistance, was my putting questions to men ofintelligence whom I knew to be neither careless nor confused, about the districts and the areas in the border territories distant from me, which it was not possible for me to reach. For that on which they agreed, I accepted as authentic: that on which they differed, I rejected. Whenever it was necessary that I myself should go to a place and make inquiries there, I did so; whatever I found unsatisfactory, and that my reasoning would not accept I have ascribed to the person who related it, or I have simply written, “it has been asserted." I have supplemented my work, too, with materials I came across in the royal archives.
No predecessor ofmine in this subject has adopted the method of procedure that I have, or sought out the useful information that I aimed at. First ofall, there was Abo ʿAbd Allāh al-Jayhānī; he was minister to the Amīr of Khurāsān, and he cultivated the pursuits of philosophy, astrology, and astronomy. He assembled around himself some foreigners and questioned them about the countries and p. 4 their revenues, the condition of the roads thither, the elevation ofthe stars above the horizons there, and the length of the meridian shadow cast by the sun. His design was by these means to achieve conquest of the territories, and to acquire knowledge of the resources of countries. He would also perfect for himself his knowledge of the stars and the revolution of the celestial spheres. Do you not see how he divided the world into seven regions, assigning to each region its particular planet? At times he would talk about the stars and mathematics; then he would move to a discussion of something that is of no interest to the people at large. Now he is describing the idols of al-Hind, now the wonders of al-Sind; then he gives details of. the taxes and revenues. I have found him mention stations that are otherwise unknown, and traveling stages that have been abandoned. At the same time, he has not subdivided the districts, nor classified the military districts؛ neither has he described the cities, or enumerated them. Rather, he just mentions the routes to the east, the west, the north and the south, with an outline of the plains, the mountains, the valleys, the hills, the woods and the rivers that are there. Thus his book was drawn out to a great length, while he neglected to mention most of the roUtes of the military districte, and to describe the important cities.
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
4
Addition/version MS. C.
I saw his work, in seven volumes, in the libraries of ʿAdhud al-Dawla, though not ascribed to him. Indeed some ascribe the authorship to Ibn Khurradādhbih I have seen, moreover, in Naysābūr, two succinct works of which one was ascribed to al-Jayhānī, the other bearing the name of Ibn Khurradādhbih as author. They agreed with each other in substance, except that al-Jayhānl had provided some additional matter.
For his part, Abu Zayd al-Balkhl aimed at providing in his book some sketches and a map of the world. He accordingly divided the earth into twenty parts; then he commented on every sketch and was very concise. He did not, however, mention the interesting particulars nor did he give any useful information in his classification and organization. In fact, he left many of the metropoles without mention of them; nor did he travel in and become familiar with the countries, nor did he visit the provinces. This is why when the Amīr of Khurasan invited him to his court to be his adviser, having reached the Jayhūn [Oxus] River, he wrote to the Amīr as follows: “Ifyou have summoned me to you on the strength of what you have heard about the soundness of my judgment, well my judgment now dissuades me from crossing this river." When the Amīr read this he ordered him to depart for Balkh.
As for Ibn al-Faqīh al-Hamadhanī, he too has followed a different method. He mentions only the largest towns, and does not classify areas or military districts. Moreover, he includes in his book matters that have no relevance to the sciences--at one time he is urging one to renounce the world, at another time he is exciting one's desire for it; then at one turn he excites tears, at another he amuses and provokes laughter. There are also al-Jāhiz and Ibn Khurradadhbih: p. s their works are very much abridged, and nothing of much utility is to be derived from them.
Addition/version MS. C
I saw, moreover, a book in the library of al-Sāhib, the authorship ascribed to Abū Zayd al-Balkhī, and with maps. I also saw a copy of exactly the same book in Naysābūr, transcribed from the work in the possession of al-Ra’ls Abū Muhammad al-Mīkālī; however, the name of the author was not given, though some credit its authorship to Ibn al-Marzubān al-Karkhī. I have seen a copy of the same work in Bukhara, the authorship ascribed to Ibrāhīm bin Muhammad al-Fārisī. This latter ascription is the most correct, for I have met with a number of persons who had met him, and had in fact seen him in the act of composing it; among these was al-Hākim Abū Hāmid al-Hamdānī and al-Hākim Abū Nasr al-Harbī. This is a book of which the maps are indeed well done; however, the author has erred in many places in the work, has far from excelled in his presentation; and has not divided the regions into districts. I have seen, too, a work written by Ibn al-Faqīh al-Hamadhānī, consisting of five volumes, and in this he follows a different course. He mentioned only the larger towns, and introduces a variety of material; at one time he is urging one to renounce this
5
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
world, then again he is exciting one’s desire for it. At times he excites to tears, at times amuses, and provokes laughter. The Kitab al-Amsiir (The لج00ء of Capita/ COies) of aا-Jahiz is a small work, and the book of Ibn al-Faqīh is along the same lines as it, though containing more trifling matter and stories. They excuse themselves for this by claiming that what they have introduced into their books they have done, so that the reader may find some relief, should he be bored. I have once in a while looked at the book of Ibn al-Faqīh, and have encountered storytelling and literary artifice regardless ofwhat country I read of. This I do not approve of; even so, I have included some stories and discussions as fitted to the subject at hand, but not so as to distract from the matter under consideration. Indeed I have used rhyming prose in some parts to entertain the ordinary reader; for while the cultured classes prefer prose to verse, the commonalty like rhymes and rhyming prose.
These are the only works on this subject that I have found after searching, enquiring, and examining libraries and collections of books. I have endeavored p. 6 not to repeat anything they reported, nor to relate any matter that they mentioned, except where it is necessary to do so, so as not to detract from any credit due them or plagiarize their works.
Addition/vcrsion MS. C.
For the scope ofthis science is, in our opinion, so wide that we need not repeat, copy from a book, or purloin the work of another, excepting only where the nature of the matter compels, or some difficulty makes such action imperative; this is what we have done in the account of the region of al-Sind and in the account of al-Sadd (the Rampart). Indeed, only he will recognize the superiority ofour book who examines their books, or who travels over the various countries, and who is a person of understanding and perspicacity. As for the maps in which we have portrayed the countries, we made every effort to ensure their correctness, having carefully studied a number of drawings. Of these, one drawing I found in the library of the ruler of al-Mashriq, done on a sheet of paper in the form of a square, though on this I did not depend. Another drawing I came across, done on a piece of linen, was in the possession of Abu al-Qāsim bin al-Anmatī, also at Naysabūr, and square in shape. I saw, too, the drawings which Ibrahīm al-Farisī made, and these, coming closer to the facts, may be relied upon, even though he shows confusion, and errs in many places. I saw an old man in Sarakhs who had made detailed drawings and maps of the countries of both the infidel and those of al-Islam: everything in them was wrong, with little exception! I asked him if he had ever travelled. Said he: “I have never been away from Sarakhs.” “Well,” said I, “I have heard of some who described the regions from hearsay, and of course the result was confusion; but I have never seen anyone who mapped the regions from hearsay, other than you.”
Indeed, only he can appreciate the excellence of my present work who has examined the works of these others, or who has himself traversed the countries with comprehension, and is ofthe persons ofeducation and intelligence. Ofcourse I do not acquit myself of error, nor my book of defect; neither do I submit it to
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
6
be free of redundance and deficiency, nor that it is above criticism in every respect.
Moreover, my reporting on those elements which I specified in my introduction will vary in completeness from one region to another, and will be uneven in its scope; for I relate only what I know absolutely. This science is not such that proceeds by analogy, or is always uniform; rather it may be fully attained only by observation and enquiry.
In this book of ours, elliptical expressions are used to indicate precise p. 7 meanings. For instance, our saying of something that it is “nonpareil" implies that there is absolutely nothing else like it whatsoever: for example, the elongated quinces ofJerusalem, the nayda (a pastry) of Egypt, the citrus of al-Basra--n٠ equal of these is to be found, though there are varieties of them. If we say “superlative", it means in excellence among the varieties; for example, the ʿUmarī plum of Shīrāz, the Damascene fig in al-Ramla, the ʿAslOnī apricot, and the Rībās currant in NaysābOr. When we say “good" the existence of a better kind is implied, [lacuna in MS.] for instance [the raisins] of al-Tā'if; as for the indigo of Arīhā (Jericho), the Zabīdī variety is better, and as for the peach of Makka, the Dāriqī variety is more excellent. Sometimes we make a summary statement, of which an elaboration is to be understood; for example, when we speak about al-Ahwāz we say that its mosque lacks reverence. We say this because it is continually thronging with scoundrels, blackguards, and reprobates, who resort thither and congregate, so that there are always rascals sitting around while the faithful are saying their prayers; it is truly a haunt of beggars and a center of the profligate. Similarly, when we say that there are no people more respectable than those of Jerusalem, we mean that you will not see anyone bilking, or giving short measure, there; you see no one drinking in broad daylight, nor even a drunkard, there; there, you find no brothel, either secret or public. But you will see their godliness and sincere devotion, so much that when the inhabitants learned that their governor was carousing, they scaled the walls of his house and routed his social gathering. Again, when we say about Shīrāz that no distinction attaches to those there who wear the ،aylasān [a garment of black wool, rounded or semi-circular, and worn, shawl-like, and usually by persons of distinction], we say it because it is the raiment of the noble and of the plebeian, of the learned and of the ignorant. How many drunks have I not seen there with their taylasāns in disarray, trailing them on the ground! In fact, whenever I asked for an audience with the Wazīr, wearing the taylasān, I would be debarred, unless I was recognized; but when I came dressed in the durrāʿa [narrow-sleeved woollen tunic, slit in front], I would be admitted.
Sometimes we have used both the masculine and feminine genders in mentioning one town or other; the masculine is ascribed to the designation of the town as mtsr [a metropolis], and the feminine to its function as qasaba [an administrative centre], or madīna [inner city]. Litterateurs have authorized this usage in referring to inanimate objects. The word balad is used to denote a
7
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
metropolis, an administrative center, a rural area, a district, a territory. When we describe the capital city in its area, we mention it by its proper name: for instance al-Fustat, Numojkath, al-Yahodiyya. Otherwise, when we mention the capitals we refer to them by the names by which they are generally known to people؛ and so we say Misr, Bukhara, Isbahan. When we use the term al-Mashriq (Orient) we mean specifically the territories of the Samanids؛ while when we say al-Sharq (East) we include also Fars, Kirman and al-Sind. Similarly when we p. s say al-Maghrib (Occident), that refers to the region, while when we say al-Gharb (West), that includes Egypt and al-Sham (Syria).
We have included in our work some obscure phrases and rhetorical flourishes, so that the writing will have an enhanced and an elliptical quality. We have included proofs in authentication of what we say, and narratives by way of confilrmation. We use rhythmic rhymed prose for embellishment, and sacred narratives so as to merit a blessing. The greater portion ofthe work, however, we have written in a easy style, so that people in general may understand it, if they but study it. We have arranged the material after the manner of legal works, so that it will find favor in the eyes of the leaned if they will reflect on it. We have pointed out differences of opinion in great detail, and given numerous instances by way of precaution. We have extended the work by describing cities from various aspects؛ and we have given accounts of important characteristics because of their obvious usefulness. We have given a clear account of the routes because of the absolute need for this؛ and have shown on maps the regions so as to facilitate one's perception of them؛ and we have enumerated the settlements, as seemed the most expedient thing to do. We have asked God--may He be exalted--for guidance before entering on the compilation of our work, and requested of Him success and assistance. We have, too, taken counsel with our foremost contemporaries and leaders. We showed our draft notes to the chief Qādhī, savant of Khurāsān, and the most respected of the judges of his time؛ everyone approved it, praised it, and encouraged its publication. Indeed, we have asserted what we have seen, and recounted what we have heard؛ and the truth of that which we established for ourselves by observation and successive corroboration we have set down without reservation. Anything, however, that we doubted or that was derived from one individual source only, we have ascribed to him from whom we heard it. We do not mention in our book other than the person of distinction, a renowned scholar, or an exalted ruler, except where it is necessary, or in the course ofa citation, or as a matter ofrespect؛ when we do mention a man in this way we mention his status, lest his name be thought to be included in the category of persons of distinction.
You should know that notwithstanding these safeguards and preconditions, I did not publish my work until I had reached the age of forty years, had traversed all the regions, and had been in the service of men of science and p.و religion. The completion of it in the metropolis of Fars coincided with the suzerainty of the Commander of the Faithful, Abo Bakr ʿAbd al-Karīm al-Taʾiʿ
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
8
lillah and in the western regions that of Abo Mansur Nazar al-ʿAzlz billah, Commander of the Faithful, in the year 375 AH/985 CE.
Addition/version MS. C.
. . . and in the days of the overlord al-Amīr Abu al-Qāsim Nūh bin Mansūr,
Client of Amīr al-Muʾminīn (Commander of the Faithful).
We have written here only about the realm of Islam; we do not bother ourselves with the countries of the unbelievers, because we did not enter them, and we see no use whatever in describing them: of course we mention those areas among them where Muslims are settled. We have divided the realm into fourteen regions, treating separately the regions of the non-Arabs as distinct from those of the Arabs.
Then we classified the districts of each region, assigned the metropoles, mentioned its primary cities, listed in order its towns and military districts, after we had depicted in a map their frontiers and boundary lines. In the maps we coloured the well-known roads red, the golden sands yellow, the salt seas green, the well-known rivers blue, the principal mountains in dust colour: thus the descriptions may be more readily perceptible to the understanding, and accessible to the specialist and layman alike.
The Arabian regions are Jazīrat al-ʿArab (the Peninsula of the Arabs); al-ʿIraq; Aqūr (Mesopotamia); al-Sham (Syria); Misr (Egypt); and al-Maghrib. p. 10 The regions of the non-Arabs are, in order, al-Mashriq; al-Daylam; al-Rihab; al-Jibal; Khūzistan; Fars; Kirman; and al-Sind. Among the regions of the Arabs is a steppe and amidst the regions of the non-Arabs is a desert, both of which we must treat of separately and describe in full detail, because this is absolutely necessary, considering the number of routes crossing them. As for the seas and rivers, we have given a separate and sufficient chapter to these, because of the great necessity for this, and because of the general uncertainty on the subject.
An Account ofthe Seas and Rivers
Know that we have not seen in the realm oflslam more than two seas. One of the two issues from the direction of the southteast and lies between the country of China and the country of the Blacks. where it touches the realm of Islam it rounds the Peninsula of the Arabs, just as we have drawn it on the map. It has many gulfs and numerous inlets. There is a difference of account among those who have described it, and among those who have mapped it are differences in its delineation. Among them some have shown it in the form of a taylasān that at one end touches the country of China, at the other that of the Abyssinians, with one arm in al-Qulzum, another in ʿAbbadan. Abū Zayd, for his part, has given it the form of a bird with its beak at al-Qulzum--but he does not notice the gulf of Wayla [ʿAqaba]--ite neck in al-ʿIrāq, its tail between Abyssinia and China. I have also seen a representation of it, on paper, in the library of the Amīr of Khurasan; and another on a piece of cotton cloth in the possession of Abu al-Qāsim ibn al-Anmatī, in Naysabūr; also in the library of ʿAdhud al-Dawla, and in that of Al-Sahib [ibn ʿAbbad]. Well, each representation differed from the others, and in some of them were gulfs and inlets unknown to me. Now I, myself, have traveled over it a distance of about two thousand farsakhs, and have gone around the entire Peninsula from al-Qulzum to ʿAbbadan; and, in addition, to wherever the ships changed course to the islands and depths of this sea. Thus I became acquainted with men of standing who were born and bred there--shipmasters, cargo masters, coastguards, commercial agents, and merchante--and I considered them among the most discerning of people about this sea, and its anchorages, its winds, and its islands. I questioned them about it, about the conditions on it, and about its limits. I noticed, too, in their p. 11 possession navigation instructions which they study carefully together and on which they rely completely, proceeding according to what is in them. From these sources I took copious notes of essential information, after I had studied them and evaluated them; and this I compared with the maps I have referred to. Now one day, as I was sitting with Abo ʿAlī bin Hazim and looking at the sea--we were on the shore at ʿAdan--said he to me: “What is it with which you seem to me to be so preoccupied?" Said t “God support the Shaykh! My mind is perplexed concerning this sea, so great is the number of conflicting accounts of
it. The Shaykh now is the most knowledgeable of men about it, because he is chief of the merchants, and his ships are continually traveling to the furthermost
parts of it. Should he be willing to give me a description of it I can rely on, and relieve me of doubt about it, perhaps he will do so.’' Said he: “You have encountered an expert in the matter!” He smoothed the sand with the palm of his hand and drew a figure of the sea on it. [Map I] It was neither a taylasān, nor a bird. But he showed it having gulfs, tongues, and numerous bays. Then said he: “This is a representation of this sea--
D
THE BEST DIVISIONS for knowledge of the regions
10
Map 1: The Persian Sea (see p. 4.5).
From MS. Sprenger 5--Ahlwardt 6034 by kind permission of the Staatsbibliothek Preussischer Kulturbesitz, Berlin, Orientabteilung.
II
AN ACCOUNT OF THE SEAS AND RIVERS
Addition/version MS. C.
. . . and, in a word, there is no doubt that it has two arms, one of which extends
to Wayla, the other to al-Qulzum, and a gulf extending from the other side to
ʿAbbadan . ..
it has no other form but this.” I shall draw a rather general map of it, however, and omit the gulfs and bays, .except for the gulf of Wayla, because it is important, and because of the great need for intelligence of it, and the frequency of voyages over it. I omit anything on which there is disagreement, and include only that on which there is complete accord. Now there is absolutely no doubt that this sea flows around three quarters of the Peninsula of the Arabs, and that it has two tongues, as we mentioned, on the side towards Egypt. These diverge at the extremity of al-Hijaz at a place called Fārān (Tārān). This sea is most vast and forbidding between ʿAdan and ʿUmān, attaining a width here of some six hundred farsakhs; thence a tongue stretehes to ʿAbbadan.
The perilous passages of it in the realm of Islām are: Jubaylān, the place of the drowning of Pharaohذ it is the fathomless deep of al-Qulzum, and here ships must travel athwart, so as to return from the desolate side to the civilized and cultivated side. Next is Fārān, a place where the winds blow from the direction both of Egypt and of Syria to form an overpowering whirl, so there is utter destruction of ships there. A practice of theirs is to send a party of men to observe the wind; if the winds abate, or if that one prevails which blows from p. 12 their side, they proceed; otherwise they have to stay a long time until the arrival of the hour of relief. Next is the port of al-Hawra’, abounding in rocks, so that ships are taken by surprise on attempting to enter it. In fact reaching from al-Qulzum as far as al-Jllr are dangerous rocks on account of which ships do not proceed except by day. The captain takes his position in the crow’s nest, and is completely absorbed in observing the sea. If a rock should be sighted he cries out: “To the right!” or, “To the left!” Two cabin boys are so stationed to repeat the cry. The helmsman has two ropes in hand which he pulls right or left, according to the directions. If they are negligent about this, the ship may strike the rocks, and be wrecked. Next, off the island of al-Silllb is a strait hazardous to ships, and a source of apprehension; one steers to the left of it to be out on the open sea. Next there is Jllbir (Jaʾiz), truly a place of calamity, where one may see the bottom of the sea; in this shallow many a ship has been wrecked. At the entrance to Kamarlln is fearfulness and calamity. Al-Mandam (Mandab), too, is a difficult strait, not to be negotiated except with the force of a freshening wind. From here the sea becomes a vast deep until ʿUmān; and here are seen, as God has mentioned, waves like towering and immovable mountains (Q!,lrʾān, sora 11, v. 42). It is entirely safe for outbound vessels, but perilous for those inbound, because of the danger of both shipwreck and drowning. Every ship passing through here needs to carry armed men, and personnel to throw Greek fire. Then there is the port of ʿUmān, bad and destructive. Further on is Fam al-Sabʿ (Fam al-Asad) [the lion’s mouth], a fearsome strait; thereafter are al-Khashabllt
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
12
(the wooden piles) pertaining to al-Basra. This, of course, is the most overwhelmingly disastrous feature, a narrow and a shallow combined. Here into the bottom of the sea trunks of palm trees have been driven, and on them huts built in which people are stationed who keep fires lighted by night, that ships may steer well away from them, and avoid the shallow places. In this connection, I have heard an old man say: “Distress really overtook us there. The ship hit bottom ten times--oer this place forty ships travel, and one returns." However, I do not wish to enlarge on this topic, otherwise I would need to mention the anchorages of this sea, and the routes over it.
The waters of this Sea of China rise about the middle and the end of each p. 1J month, and twice in every day and night. From this circumstance come the ebb and flow of the tide at al-Basra; when the tide rises, it pushes back the waters of the Dijla (Tigris), which then flow into the mouths of the channels that irrigate the agricultural estates there. When it falls, the waters recede. People differ on the cause of this phenomenon: some say that an angel plunges his finger into the
water every day and hence the tide flows; when he removes his finger, the ebb
ensues. According to KaCb al-Ahbar, al-Khidhr [a popular storied gifted person in the service of God. See Qpi'ān, sura 18, vv. 60 & seqq.] met an angel, and asked to be informed about the flow and the ebb. The angel explained that the whale breathes in so the water flows into its nostrils, and that is the ebb; then the whale breathes out so that it expels the water from its nostrils, and that is the flow. Another explanation of the matter was told us, which I shall mention in the account of the region of al-'Iraq.
Addition/version MS. c
The astronomers give another explanation for this, to bo found in the work of Abu Maʿshar al-Balkhl, the astronomer.
In this sea also are narrows and deeps, the narrowest place being between Ra's al-Jumjuma and al-Daybul. Beyond this is a sea the depth of which is unknown, in it innumerable islands. Some of these islands are ruled by an Arab king, and others to the number of one thousand seven hundred, it is said, are under the rule of a woman. Those who have entered her kingdom assert that she sits before her subjects, naked, on a couch, wearing a crown; around her stand four thousand maids of honour, naked. Further on is the Sea of Harkand (Bay of Bengal), vast as an ocean, in which is situated SarandIb (Island of Ceylon): this island is eighty farsakhs in length, and has a like width. In it is situated the mountain on which Adam was thrown: it is called al-Rahun (Adam's Peak), and may be seen from a distance of a journey of several days.
On it is the impress of a foot sunk to a depth of about seventy cubits; the other footprint is distant the journey of a day and a night, and is in the floor of the sea. A light is seen on it every night. Here also are found rubies, the best p. 14 ones being those that the wind causes to roll. Here too is an aromatic plant,
13
AN ACCOUNT OF THE SEAS AND RIVERS
resembling musk. On this island are three kings. Also here is the camphor tree than which none grows higher. The trunk is of white wood, and one tree will give shade to more than two hundred men. The lower portion of the tree is bored and the camphor flows out on it like a gum, after which the tree withers. Close by is the island of al-Kalb (Nicobar) in which are mines of gold. The coconut is the food of the inhabitants, who are fair, nude, and handsome. Close to this is the island called al-Raml (Sumatra). Here the tree called Baqqam (a red-wood) flourishes, being propagated by offsets؛ its fruit resembles that of the locust, and tastes bitter. Its roots provide an antidote for even a very quick poison. The island of UsqOtra (Socotra) is like a tower in the dark sea؛ it marks the limit of the Indian pirates, the terror of ships hereabouts, nor do they cease to fear them until they have cleared the island. This is the more favored of the two seas, the more highly regarded.
The other sea issues from the furthest west between al-Sūs al-Aqsa and al-Andalus. It is broad where it emerges from the ocean, thereafter it narrows, then widens again as far as the confines of Syria. [Map II] I heard one of the learned men of the Maghrib interpret the verse, “Lord of the two easts and Lord of the two wests" (QJriin, sūra 55, v. 17) as follows: the two wests are the two sides of this sea, the sundown of summer being on the right side and the sundown of winter on the left of it.
Addition/version MS. c.
I have heard the people of Tanja say that in some places it has a width of some few farsakhs, and at the passes of al-Andalus a journey of six days. It is said that its length from east to west is two thousand ...
I heard some from there say, too, that the sea is so narrow in the vicinity ofTanja that it. ... [lacuna in MS.], and they agreed that at the passes of al-Andalus one who sees one shore may have the other in view also. Ibn al-Faqlh points out that the length of this western Romaean sea is two thousand five hundred p. is farsakhs, measured from Antakiya to Jazaʾir al-Sa<ada (the Fortunate Isles), and its width in one place is five hundred farsakhs, and in another two hundred farsakhs. All the shoreland on the south side from Tarsfls to Dimyat, and thence to al-Sns is held by the Muslims؛ all of the other side, meaning the left of the sea, is held by Christians.
Addition/version MS. c.
The sum total of the islands is one hundred sixty-two. These were in a flourishing condition until the Muslims invaded them and ravaged them, excepting three large one^Qabrus (Cyprus), situated opposite Dimashq (Damascus), and with a circuit of one hundred thirteen farsakhs; Iqrltish (Crete), over against Barqa, with a circuit of one hundred farsakhs; and the island of Isqiliyya (Sicily), which we will thoroughly examine in our account of the region of al-Maghrib.
ب١«امذب٠
ssn3J٥؟soqjniin^ J3qos؟JO ‘UIRI ‘zi؟iu3؟3iq؟٠Suni قل0لاا٠sw q 19 ipjBAqqvi JoSuojdg^ ٩؟0 uoissiuuod puوااأوJS؟؟qsj؟٩3qjoqq 1 diل: ٠8اال ٠ا-ه٠للا(ءوو٠d l)
15
AN ACCOUNT OF THE SEAS AND RIVERS
In this sea are three flourishing and populous islands—Isqiliyya (Sicily) facing al-Maghrib, Iqrltish (Crete) opposite Egypt, and Qubrus (Cyprus) over against Syria. It has a number of well-known gulfs. On its shore are many towns, important frontier posts and military stations. Part of the sea borders the territory of the Romaeans to the borders of al-Andalus. The Romaeans are the masters here and very much dreaded; and they and the inhabitants of Sicily and al-Andalus are the most familiar with this sea, its confines and its gulfs, because they constantly journey over it, raiding the lands on the opposite side. Their routes, too, to Egypt and Syria are across this sea. I have been on board ship there with them for a long time, always asking them about it and about its characteristics; I would repeat to them what I had learned about it from hearsay, but rarely did I find them differing over it. It is a difficult and stormy sea, its booming always audible especially on Thursday nights. [The nychthemeron that includes the day of Friday begins at sundown on Thursday.]
I was informed of the following tradition by the jurist Abu al-Tayyib ʿAbd Allilh bin Muhammad al-Ja1a1, at al-Rayy, who had it from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Yazld al-Astarabildhl, who had it from ʿAbbils bin Muhammad, who had it from Abo Salama, who had it from SaʿJd bin Zayd, who had it from Ibn Yasar reporting it from ʿAbd Allilh bin ʿAmr. The tradition relates that when God created the Sea of al-Shilm, he uttered this inspiration to it: “I have created thee and designed thee as a carrier for some of my servants, who seek my bounty, praising me, worshipping me, magnifying me, and glorifying me; so how wilt thou act towards them?" Said the sea: “My Lord, then I shall drown them." Said the Lord: “Begone, for I curse thee, and will diminish thy worth and thy fish." Then the Lord inspired into the sea of al-ʿʿrilq (the Indian Ocean) the selfsame words, and it said: “My Lord, in that case I shall carry them on my 16 back; when they praise Thee I praise Thee with them, and when they worship Thee I worship Thee with them, when they magnify Thee I magnify Thee with them." Said the Lord: “Go, for I have blessed thee, and will increase thy bounty and thy fish." Here then is proof that there are but two seas.
Now I do not know whether these two seas empty into the ocean or proceed from it. I have read in some books that they both proceed from it; but that they pour into it is more probable.

D
Addition/version MS. c.
Sahib al-Zlj (“the keeper of the astronomical tables"), and Qudama al-Kitib, and al-Jayhilnl have made the seas five in number, adding the Encircling Oceanan, the Gulf [of Qustantlniyya, Constantinople], and the lake of Tabaristan. As for Ibrahlm [al-Farisl al-Istakhrl], he makes the number of seas three, including the Encircling Ocean. As for us, we do not go beyond what God-may He be praised and exalted-says in His Book ...
Indeed, ifa person goes out from Farghilnil he does not cease to descend until he arrives at Egypt, and from there, again, to the remotest part of al-Maghrib.
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
16
Moreover, the people of al-ʿIrāq call the Persians the people of the upper ground, and the people of al-Maghrib the people of the lower ground. This supports the views we have expressed, and indicates that the seas are rivers that combine and pour into the ocean-but God knows best. Abu Zayd made the seas
three in number, by the addition of the ocean, but we ourselves do not include it
in our reckoning, because it, as is said, encircles the world as with a ring-having neither bound nor limit. As for al-JayhanI, he makes the seas five in number, by the addition of the Sea of the Khazars (Caspian), and of the Gulf of Constantinople (Sea of Marmara). For our part we have limited ourselves to the number God made known in His Book where it says: “He let forth the two seas to meet together, between them a barrier they cannot surpass. Come forth from them are the pearl and the coral" (Quran, sura 55, vv. 19, 20, 22). The barrier is the land from al-Farama to al-Qulzum, a distance of three days' journey. But if it were to be argued that God-may He be exalted-wished by the expression “the two seas" (Quran, sura 25, v. 53), to refer only to the one of fresh water and one of salt water, since they do not mingle, as the verse says: “It is He who has made to flow the two seas," we reply that the pearl and the coral are not found in fresh water, whereas God says “from them both;" and there is no disagreement among the learned that the pearl is taken from the Sea of China, and the coral from the Romaean Sea. Therefore we are certain the reference is to these two seas only. Again, suppose it were to be argued that the seas are seven in number, since God-may He be exalted and glorified—has said: “Were all
the trees on earth to become pens, and the sea, ink, and the sea increased again with seven other seas. ...” (Quran, sura 31, v. 27), and the addition be made of al-Maqloba (Dead Sea) and the Sea of Khwarazm (Aral Sea); the reply is that God-may He be exalted-alid not say “the seas are seven in number," but rather He mentions only the Sea of the Arabs, and suggests that if there should be seven seas like it and they, too, were to be made into ink; this is the same sense in which He said: “Were the iniquitous to have all that is in the earth all together and the like of it with it ...” (Quran, sura 39, v. 47) In fact, on the basis of this claim the seas would have to be reckoned eight in number, so let us raise this supposition now as a question and deal with it thoroughly. For suppose we allow that the sea is the Sea of al-Hijaz, and the seven are the sea of al-Qulzum,. the Sea of al-Yaman, the Sea of <Uman, the Sea of Makran, the Sea of Kirman, the Sea of Fars, and the Sea of Hajar-and that makes eight, just as the verse says .. Indeed it may be urged further that you must, according to this interpretation, allow the existence of even more than ten seas, seeing that you have omitted the Sea of China, the Sea of India, and the Sea of al-Zanj (Blacks). The answer to this is twofold. In the first place, God-may He be exalted—spoke to the Arabs about what they knew and could see with their own eyes, so as to impress the argument on them with greater force. Now their voyages were solely in these seas, and, as you realize, this is the sea that, under various names, surrounds the realm of the Arabs from al-Qulzum (Red Sea) to
D
p. 17
D
17
AN ACCOUNT OF THE SEAS AND RIVERS
ʿAbbadan. Our second point is, that, supposing we do not deny that the seas might be many, and that God-may He be exalted-in this verse referred to eight of them only. Suppose we were to allow all this, then you may say that the argument comes back on me, and that I have to admit that the seas may be seven, and God mentioned in that verse only two of them. Now my answer is that the one position does not correspond with the other. You see, God-may He be exalted-said in that verse, “He let forth the two seas to meet together;" in this He refers to two particular seas, using the “a" and the “1" [“al"="the"], not to refer to just the class in general, but rather to specify the individual. When He said in this verse that “if He were to add seven seas to it," He did not insert the definite article; and of course there is the possibility that He could mean by that “seven out of a number," just as He said, “He compelled it against them seven nights and eight days, grueling," (QuYJiin, sura 69, v. 7)-and the days of God are many. However, He has said in another verse, “as for the three who lagged behind ...” (QuYJiin, sura 9, v. 118); it is not possible to say that the men were more than three in number.
If it were to be argued that, since there is a disagreement about the interpretation of this verse, and we know that the Sea of China does not meet that of the Romaeans, the argument based upon the verse then collapses, and that the other verse is clearly established so that the seas must be seven: my p. IS answer to that is that the disagreement is removed by God's saying, "Come forth from them are the pearl and the coral;" and as to their meeting, a number of the elders of Egypt have told me that the Nile used to flow into the Sea of China up to recently.
If it were to be said here, “Your interpretation necessarily entails a contradiction, because according to it the two seas meet; but between them, as you have already said, there is a distance of three days' joumey-and the Book of God is exempt from contradiction: so our interpretation is in order, the meeting of the two is the flowing of the fresh over the salt water, and the barrier is the prevention of their mixing with each other؛" we reply that our explanation is also in order and we have given to every expression its proper meaning; for we have said that the meeting is what we mentioned in respect of the flow of the Nile into the Sea of China; and as part of the Nile today debouches into the Romaean Sea, it is in the Nile that the meeting ofthe two seas takes place. In fact it is said that the mother ofMūsa--o him be peace،ast the cradle in which he lay into the sea of al-Qulzum and it floated on the Nile to the capital. Moreover, the meeting of things is not necessarily a mingling, because there may be a separation and a distance between things that meet; but what they mean should be called mingling, and not meeting.
Ifsomeone should say: "Why did you include the seas of the Persians among the seven, seeing you had said that God spoke to the Arabs only about what they were familiar with?" The answer to this has two parts. In the first place, the Arabs had frequently traveled to Fars. You know that ʿUmar bin al-Khattab-may he
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
18
be pleasing to God—said, “I learned justice from Kisri!.؛" and he mentions the apprehension of God of that monarch, and his conduct of government. Moreover, anyone who makes a journey to Hajar and ʿAbbadan must have a knowledge of the seas of Fi!.rs, Kirman, and Tlz Makran؛ and do you not know that many people refer to the part of this sea as far as the coast of al-Yaman as the Sea of Fil.rs؛ or that most of the ship-builders and mariners are Persians? In addition, this sea that stretches from ʿUman to ʿAbbadan is not very wide, so that a voyager cannot be unfamiliar with its coasts.
If it were then said: “Why, then, did you not say the same in respect of the sea of al-Qulzum to the place where it grows wide?" We answer that we have already said that from al-Qulzum to ʿAydhab, and beyond, is desert and void. p. 19 It has not been understood that any part of this region has given its name to this sea. Besides, we have resolved this question in our previous answers.
If it is asked how we can consider one sea as if it were eight separate seas-the answer is that this is well known to everyone who sails the sea. You see how God referred to the Sea of the Romaeans as “two seas," as He says: “And when Moses said to his page, ‘I shall keep on walking until I reach the confluence of the two seas, though for ages I continue roaming.’ And when they reached the meeting-point of both, ....” (Qurān, sūra 18, vv. 60-61). Now, all this took place on the coast of Syria, and the traces of it, plainly to be seen, including Sakhrat Mūsil. (the Rock of Moses), are there in evidence. But now, of course, it may be asked, “Why have you not interpreted God’s utterance, ‘He set loose the two seas,’ as meaning but one sea?" We reply that this is inadmissible, because God-the most exalted-said “between the two is a barrier,’’ and the barrier is a partition.
In any case, we say to the one who controverts the matter with us: “If the matter is as you assert, then show us eight seas in the realm of Islam!" If he wants to include the encircling ocean we say that that is on the boundary of the world, with no known limits. Should he want to include the Gulf of Constantinople, we should say that it is but a gulf of the Romaean Sea that goes out beyond Sicily-— are they not constantly setting out on raids over it? If he were to suggest the Sea of the Khazars (Caspian Sea), we would say that it is a lake: do not most people call it the Lake of Tabaristan, and of course you must know how close its shores are to each other? If he were to mention al-Maqlūba (Dead Sea), and the Lake of Khwarazm (Aral Sea), we should say that whoever considers these two part of the total number of seas must similarly consider the lakes of al-Rihab, Fil.rs, and Turkistan, so that the number then would exceed twenty. So ifour disputant is fair, he will simply accept our argument—but God knows best.
The rivers that have an abundant flow in the realm, and that are the most distinguished in my opinion, are twelve in number: Dijla (Tigris), al-Furāt (Euphrates), al-Nll (Nile), Jayhnn (Oxus), Nahr al-Shash (Jaxartes), Sayhan, Jayhan, Baradiln, Mihran (Indus), Nahr al-Rass (Araxes), Nahr al-Malik, Nahr
D
19
AN ACCOUNT OF THE SEAS AND RIVERS
al-Ahwaz (Kiron), all of which are navigable. Of lesser importance are another fifteen: Nahr al-Marwayn, Nahr Harāt (Harl Rod), the river ofSijistan (Hilmand), the river of Balkh, Nahr al-Sughd, Tayforl, Zandarod, Nahr al-ʿAbbas, Baradil, Nahr al-Urdunn (Jordan), al-Maqlob (Orontes), the river of Antilkiya (Orontes, p. 20 lower course), the river of Arrajlln (Tilb), the river Shlrln, and the river of Samandar.
Less important waterways than these are small, and some of them we shall mention in our accounts of the different regions, such as the river Tilb, al-Nahrawiln [canal in al-ʿʿrāq], al-Zāb, and the like.
The Tigris takes its origin from a spring which emerges from below the fortress of Dhu al-Qarnayn near Bilb al-Zulmilt (Gate of the Dark Regions), in the region of Aqor (Mesopotamia) above al-Mawsil,	-
Addition/version MS. c.
between two mountains near Amid. There, a river joins it coming from the direction of the town of Balad, and again it falls between two mountains.
Lower down it is joined by a number of streams, among them al-Zilb, and continues until it is met by the Euphrates, and the branches of al-Nahrawiln, close to Baghdad.
Addition/version MS. c.
Its length as far as ʿAbbadan is about eight hundred miles.
The Euphrates comes out of the territory of the Romaeans,
Addition/verrion MS. c between Malatya and Shimshat. then makes a circuit Addition /verrion MS. c.
... in a southerly direction.
around the region of Aqor; it receives its tributary, the Khilbor, then enters al-ʿʿrāq. Here it spreads out widely to form the marshes beyond al-Kofa; then joins with the Tigris in four branches.
Addition/version MS. c.
It then divides into two branches, one taking its course towards the west until it reaches al-Knfa, the other taking a direct course, and so waters the cultivated area around Baghdad. A part of it then spreads out to form marshes, and a part meets the Tigris at Wasit, after a number of streams have branched off from it below al-Anbar, to join the Tigris in the district of Baghdad. From its source in upper Aqor to where it ends at the other side of Wil.sit is one hundred thirty-five miles.
With respect to the Nile, it comes forth from the country of the Nubians,
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
20
Addition/version MS. c.
[The outlet of the Nile is from the country ofthe Nubians] in the district of the Upper Saʿid, and it flows to the city of Uswiln. It then turns away and follows a sinuous course between the mountains called Baloqiyil, returning to Maqadoniya, passing close by al-Fustat, afterwards dividing into seven branches. Of these, one branch flows to Alexandria, then, after dividing into two channels, flows westward and falls into the sea. The remaining six branches flow in a direct course towards two lagoons, where Tinnls and Dimyilt are situated, to pour into the Romjlean Sea. I have heard some of the people there say that a branch of it used to flow to the Sea of China, debouching into it above al-Qulzum, and indeed they pointed the place out to me. From its source at the extremity of the region to its debouchment is a distance of two thousand miles, then cuts through the region of Egypt. It forms branches below al-Fustat, one flowing into the sea at al-Iskandariyya (Alexandria), the other at Dimyat (Damietta). According to al-JayhllnI it has its origin in the Mountain of the Moon, discharges into two lakes beyond the equator, thence makes its course through the land of the Nubians. Others have said that its origin is not known, and that no one knows where it comes from. p. 21 We have received a tradition from Abu al-Hasan al-Khalil bin al-Hasan al-Sarakhsi in Naysllbur, following Abu al-Hasan ʿAlI bin Muhammad al-Qantarl, following al-Maʾm0n bin Ahmad al-SalmI, following Muhammad bin Khalaf, following Abo Salih, secretary of al-Layth bin Saʿad, who heard it from al-Layth himself. It has been recounted-but God alone knows the truth of the matter-thtt there was among the descendants of al--īs [Esau] a man named Hll'idh bin-AbI Shālūm bin al-<ls, who, fleeing for refuge from one of their kings, entered the land of Egypt, where he remained for a number of years. However, when he saw the wonders of its Nile, and the products it brings forth there he vowed to God that he would not leave its banks until he reached the extremity of it, where it has its origin, unless he should die in the meantime. He accordingly journeyed until he reached a green sea, and beheld the Nile cutting its course through this sea-MuqaddasI says that this sea is the encircling ocean. He walked along the sea-shore, and came upon a man standing in prayer under an apple tree; and when he saw him, he was cordial towards him and greeted him. Then enquired the man: “Who art thou?" Said he: “I am Hāʾidh the son of Abu' Shalom, the son of al-ʿIs, the son of Ishaq-God's peace and blessings be upon him-and who art thou?" Said he: “I am ʿlmrlln the son of al--Is, the son oflshllq-may peace be upon him." “And what has caused thee to come here, 0 ʿlmrān?" “What brought me hither is what brought thee; and when I had arrived at this place, God—may He be exalted-instructet me: ‘Remain in this place until you receive my instruction.'" Said the other: “0 ʿlmrān, inform me about the Nile." Said he: “I will not tell thee unless thou doest what I ask thee." Said he: “And what is that?" Said ʿlmran, “If on thy return to me, and I am still living, thou shalt remain with me until God will reveal to me what to do in the
21
AN ACCOUNT OF THE SEAS AND RIVERS
matter؛ or if God should take me, then thou shalt inter me." Said Ha’idh, “I accept these conditions." Said ʿImran to him: “Continue thy journey along the shore of this sea, and thou wilt come to where there is a riding animal that is confronting the sun, at which, on its rising, it rushes to devour it. Do not allow this to frighten thee؛ rather, mount it, and it will take thee to the other shore of the sea؛ travel along the shore and return until thou endest up at the Nile. Travel along its course and thou shalt reach a land of iron, where the mountains and the trees and the plains are [all of iron. Proceed until thou shalt reach an area of silver, where the mountains and the trees, and all other objects are of silver. Do thou go on until thou shalt come to an area of gold, in which everything is (text supplied from Mu<jām al-Buldān of Yaqnt)] of gold. Thou shalt finally come upon a dome of gold, in which knowledge of the Nile will be given to thee."
He accordingly pursued his course until he came to the dome, and lo! water was flowing down the wall into the dome. Here it divided and flowed through the four doors. However, three of the streamlets sank into the ground, but there was one that flowed on the surface of the earth—and this is the Nile—so he drank from its waters and rested. He then advanced to the wall and aspired to climb it, when an angel appeared and said to him: “0 Haʾidh, stay where thou art for thou hast achieved knowledge of the Nile, and this is Paradise." The narrator recounted this story at full length.
The Jayhun (Oxus) has its origin in the country ofWakhkhan, flows toward al-Khuttal, where it widens and increases with six tributaries flowing into it—the rivers Hulbuk, then the river Barban, then the river of Farghar, next is the river of Andljaragh, then the river Wakhshab, and this is the deepest one of them. Then the river of al-Quwadiyan [Qubadhiyan] joins it؛ then the rivers of al-Saghaniyan. All these are from the Haytal side of the river. Then enlarged like a lake it drops down to Khwarazm, and flows into a marsh of briny water, having already irrigated a number of cities, among them all those of Khwarazm, east and west.
The river al-Shash (Syr Darya) emerges from on the right of the country of the Turks (Turkistan), and flows also into the lake of Khwarazm (Aral Sea). It approaches the Jayhun River in volume, but it appears, as it were, without life.
Addition/version MS. c.
Then a channel runs from it into the area lying between UsrUshana and
Ghujanda. From the beginning to the end of this river is a distance of one
hundred forty farsakhs.
As for the Sayhan, the Jayhan, and the Baradan, these are the rivers of Tarsus, Adhana and al-MassIsa. They emerge from the land of the Romaeans, then they flow into the sea, as do the other rivers of Syria with the exception of the Barada and al-Urdunn (the Jordan)؛ both of these flow into the Dead Sea. The Barada debouches from the mountains above Damascus, flows through the capital, and irrigates the district. The remaining waters divide themselves,
p. 22
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
22
one portion forming an evaporative fen at the extremity of the district, the other part flowing down towards the Jordan.
The river Mihran (Indus) emerges from al-Hind, then pours into the Sea of p. 23 China after receiving a number of tributaries in its course through the regions. In the taste of its water, in its color, in its rise, together with the presence of crocodiles in it, it resembles the Nile.
The rivers al-Rass, al-Malik, and al-Kurr all emerge from the domains of the Romaeans, and irrigate the region of al-Rihab؛ they then fall into the lake of the Khazars (Caspian).
The rivers of al-Ahwaz consist of a number of streams that descend over the region from the mountains, then unite by Hisn Mahdl, and empty themselves into the Sea of China near ʿAbbadan. I have come across the following in a book in al-Basra: “Four rivers from Paradise are in this world-the Nile, Jayhon, the Euphrates, and al-Rass؛ four are from the rivers of hell-al-Zabadam, al-Kurr, Sanja, and al-Samm."
The rivers of al-Marwayn, Harat, Sijistan, and Balkh emerge from the four sides of the country of al-Ghnr, then flow down into their respective districts and irrigate them.
The TayfOrl descends from the mountains ofJurjan and waters the district؛ the river of al-Rayy emerges above the town in what is like a bubbling fountain; it then divides itself into branches and descends to the district. The Zandarod comes down from the mountains of Isfahan, enters into al-Yahodiyya, and p. 24 irrigates the district; As for the rivers of Fars, they flow into five lakes in the region. The river Tab comes from al-Burj beyond Sumayram, then flows by the frontiers of Fars, to pour into the Sea of China near Slnlz. The river of Arrajan gushes out from the mountains of Fars؛ some briny water flows into it below al-ʿAqaba (the mountain pass) and it irrigates the district by individual allotments.
D
An Account of Names and their Diversities
You should know that in the realm of Islam are towns and districts and villages that have similar names, but are in different locations. This circumstance itself is a difficulty for people in general, as is the matter of people who are named after those places. We accordingly decided to provide this chapter, and devote it to those names. We shall likewise give the names of things that peoples of the regions name differently, as this will undoubtedly be of use to people visiting those regions.
Al-S٥s-a district in the furthest extremity of al-Maghrib; a town in the beginning of it; another in Haytal; a district in Khnzistan. In al-Maghrib also is Sūsa.
Atrabulus (Tripoli}- town on the coast of (the district of) Dimashq; another on the coast of Barqa.
Bayrat—a town in (the district of) Dimashq; a town in Khnzistan.
(■Asqalan—a town on the coast of Filastln; [a town with] a minbar (pulpit, mosque) in Balkh.
Ramada—a town in al-Maghrib; a village in Balkh; another in Naysabnr; another in al-Ramla.
Tabariin—a city on the border of Qumis; the rustiiq (outlying rural district with towns and villages) of Sarakhs. Tabaran, the capital of Tns; Tabaristan a district; Tabariyya, the capital of al-Urdunn; Tuwiiriin, a district in al-Sind; Tabarak, a place in al-Rayy.
Qūhistiin—a district in Khurasan; a town in Kirman.
Tabas ai-Tamr (of the dates) and Tabas al-c٧nniib (of the jujube), two towns in Quhistan.
Dihistiin—a town in Kirman; an area in Jurjan; an area in Badhghls.
Nasū—a town in Khurasan; another in Fars; another in Kirman.
A/-Baydhaʾ-،s also Nasa of Fars; a district in al-Maghrib; a town in the area ofal-Khazar.
p. 25 A/-Basra-،n al-ʿIraq; a town in al-Maghrib.
A/-Hira—a town that at one time existed in the district of al-Knfa; a village in Fars; a way station in Sijistan; a quarter in the city ofNaysabur.
A/-Jūr—a town in Fars; and al-Jnr, a quarter in the city ofNaysabnr. Hulwan—a district in al-ʿʿraq; a town in Misr; a village in Naysabnr; another in Quhistan.
Karkh—a town in the district of Samarra; a quarter in the city of Baghdad; a [place with a] mosque (minbar) in al-Rihab; a village in the district of Baghdad: and
Karkha-a town in Khnzistan; Karakh a town in Harat.
Al-Shash—a district in Haytal; a village in al-Rayy.
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
24
a village in Nasa of Khuriisiin. ؛Astariibiidh—a town in Jurjan a village in al-Rayy. ؛Karaj—townland and town in Hamadhan the ؛some villages in al-Rayy and Naysabur ؛.astajird— town in al-Saghaniyan
town of Dastajird in Kirmiin. another in Kirman. ؛MughUn— town in Qumis another in al-Sind. ؛Biisand—a town in al-Saghaniyan
Awa—two towns in al-Jibal. a village in al-Rayy. ؛A/-Ahwāz—the metropolis of Khuzistan a town in Quhistan. ؛n Athur؛-A/-Raqqa and ؛another on the borders of Qumis ؛Khwiir—a town in the district of al-Rayy
there is KhUr in Balkh and KhUr in Quhistan. and ؛Māqān-a town in al-Rihab ؛a village in Naysabor ؛Nuqiin—a town in Tos
ManUqiin—a town in Kirman.
and Kufan-the caravanserai of ؛Kofa, a town in Badhghls ؛n al-ʿIraq؛-A/-Kufa
Ablward.
؛al-Khaniqln in the district of al-Knfa ؛Khānt'qīn-a town in Hulwan of al-ʿIraq
and
al-Khaniqa, the conventicle of the ؛KhānUqa—in the district of Athor
Karriimiyya sect in Iliyii (Jerusalem).
؛A/-Hadītha—a town on the Tigris and another on the Euphrates in Aqur and al-Muhdatha, a ؛and al-Hadath—a town in the district of Qnnasrln
stopping-place in the open country of Taymaʾ. two stopping-places in the ؛A/-Nabk and a/CAwnīd—two towns in al-Hijiiz
open country of Taymiiʾ.
A/-Zarqāʾ—a village on the road to al-Rayy; a place on the road to Dimashq. and ʿAkk is a tribe in ؛ʿAkkā—a town on the coast in the district of al-Urdunn
al-Yaman.
the capital ofjozjiin. ؛A/-YahUdyya—the capital of the district of Isfahan Anbiir—a town in Jozjiin. ؛A/-Anbār— town in the district of Baghdad and ؛and the village of Isfahiinak is on the road thereto ؛Isfahān— district
al-Isbahiiniit—a town in Fiirs.
؛Madīna-the City of the Prophet-God’s peace and blessings be upon him also Madīnat al-Sa/iim ؛the Madina of Isfahan ؛the Madina of al-Rayy
also al-Madāʾin in al-ʿIrāq. ؛[[Baghdad Kutii Rabbii and Kutii al-Tarlq—a town and a village in al-Iriiq.
and Daskara in al-Iriiq. ؛A/-Daskara—in Khuzistan and Fāryiib in Juzjan. ؛Biiriib- country district in Isbljab also Tiilaqan in Juzjiin. ؛A/-Tii/aqiin—a town in al-Daylam also a town in Ghaznln. ؛Abshīn-the royal city of the Shiir a town of Istakhr. ؛Hariit--fKhurasan Bagh/iin—Upper, and Lower: two towns in Tukharistiin.
.a village in Naysiibur ؛Asadiiwiidh—a town in al-Jibal
p. 26
25
AN ACCOUNT OF NAMES AND THEIR DIVERSITIES
a village in Nasa of Khurasan. ؛Biyār—a townlike settlement in Qumis
Widhār—a rustāq of Samarqand.
and Jurjāniyya, a town in Khwarazm. ؛p. 27 Jurjān—a district in al-Daylam and Ba/khān—a town beyond Ablward. ؛Balkh and Qazwīnak a village in al-Dlnawar. ؛Qazwīn—a town in the district ofal-Rayy
also, a village in al-ʿIraq. ؛Filastin^f al-Sham ؛a village in al-ʿlraq ؛A/-Ram/a-the capital of Filastln Qaryat a/-Ram/—a town in Khuzistan.
Afrāwa—the ؛Farah—a town of Sijistan ؛Firabr—a town on the Jayhun
caravanserai of Nasa.
til-the capital of! ؛the capital of Tabaristan ؛Amul—a town on the Jayhun
al-Khazar.
a way station in Sijistan. ؛Bakrābādh—a townlike settlement in Jurjan a town in al-ʿlraq. ؛A/-Nī/—the river of Misr Jubayl^n the littoral of Dimashq. ؛Jabala—a town associated with Hims a way station in the desert. ؛a village in Yathrib ؛Qubā-a town in Farghana Qumisa-a village in Isfahan. ؛Qiimis—a district in al-Daylam a quarter in the ؛A/-Shāmāt—the townships of al-Shami a town in Kirman
suburbs of Naysabur.
JabalJarash in al-Urdunn. ؛Jurash—a town in al-Yaman a village in ؛another in Marw ؛Sanjān—a town in the district of al-Rihab Zanfana town in the district ofal-Rayy. ؛Sinjār—a town in Athur ؛Naysabur
There are Marw al-Shahijan, and Marw al-Rudh.
Suqyā Bani Ghtfar. ؛Suqyā Yazid-a town and a stopping place in al-Hijaz a quarter in the town of al-Mawsil. ؛Hadhramawt-a town in al-Ahqaf a village in Arrajan. ؛A/-Rusāfa—a quarter in Baghdad Nīnawā—al-Q!\dlma (ancient) and al-Hadltha (modern), in al-Mawsil.
ʿAskar ؛a village in al-Basra ؛ʿAskār Abi Jafar-to the eastern side of Baghdad
؛Mukram—a district of Khuzistan
a/-ʿAskar-a quarter in the city of al-Ramla, ؛ʿAskar Banjahīr—an area in Balkh
a village in Bukhara. ؛another in Naysabur Al-Dawraq—a district, town, and village in Khuzistan. a water hole in the ؛one in al-Bataʾih ؛Al-Zubaydtyya-a way station in al-Jibal al-Zabadāni-a town in [the district of] Dimashq. ؛desert al-Haddadiyya— village in al- Bataʾih. ؛p. 2S Al-Haddāda-a village in Qumis he built besides, ؛Naysābur, Sābūr, Jundaysābur—three towns which Sabur built in Arrajan, the town Balasabur, and in Istakhr, Arsābūr.
Kaminiya—a town in ؛Karman Shāhān—a town in al-Jibal ؛Kirnān—a region Bayt Kamā—a village in Iliya (Jerusalem). ؛Bukhara ʿUmān—a district in al-Jazlra; Ammān—a town in Filastln.
a river in Aqur. ؛A/-Zāb-an area in al-Maghrib .Iskā^—pper, and Lower, in Baghdad
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
26
Jī/ān-in al-Daylam, commonly called Gilan; al-Jll-a town in al-ʿIrāq.
Jazirat al-CArab [the Peninsula of the Arabs]- region; Jazirat ibn CUmar in A٩ūry Jazirat Ba^iZa^h^^n^ya١4^UJazir^t ^bt Shurik hnfn٠a١ al-Jazira— a town near al-Fustat; Jazirat Bani Haddān in die sca of al-Qulzum.
QafCat ^l-Sirat, QafCat al-Quwiirib, QafCat Burjuma, QafCat al-Nusūr١ QafCat Shamit , QafCat Ibn al-Harab, QafCat Al^ī Thawr, QafCat al-BaRat-- in al-Maghrib, and there is al-QafCa in al-Rihab--all of these are towns.
Him M^c^ltd^^^a town hnaTAhwaz; Hisn al-Sūdan١ Him ٥^I^^B^٠^٠^٥^١,, Hisn Ibn Salih, towns in the district of Sijilmiisa; Hisn Bulkūna—a town in al-Andalus; Hisn al-Khawiibi in al-Sham; Hisn Mansūr in al-Thugūr [collective: The Frontier Towns].
Qasr Ibn Hubayra, {!jlsr al-Jiss in al-ʿIrāq; Qasr al-Fulūs, a town in the district ofTahart; Qasr al-Ifriqi, Madinat al-fhtsūr (Taqiyūs) in Ifriqiya; Qasr al-Rih— a way station in Naysabūr; Qasr al-Lusū—a way station in al-Jibal. p. 29 Tiihart-the Upper, a district, the Lower, a town; in al-Maghrib.
Sūq Ibn iOuf in fnqyya١ S٥q Ibn Habla, S٥q K^ra١ Sūq Ibn Mablūl, Sūq Ibriihim-towns in the district of Tahart. There are market towns [sūq = market] named after the days of the week in Khūzistan; some towns in Tukharistan are named according to the markets.
A/-Ahsāʾ-a district; also a way station in al-Hijaz.
Al-Qādistyya-a town in the district of al-Kūfa; a way station in Samarra.
Ghazza in Filastln; al-Ghuzza in Tahart.
Bathā> of Makka; al-Bathāʾ-a town in Tahart.
Hariin—a village in Isfahan; Wahriin—a town in Tahart.
Tabriz-in al-Rihab; Tabrin in Tahart.
Tiiwilt AbI Maghūl, and another (TawIlt) two towns in Tahart.
CAyn al-Mughatta-in Isqiliyya (Sicily);
CAyn Zarba-in al-Thugūr; Raʾs al-CAyn, in AthOr: towns and villages; YanbuC in al-Hijaz; CAinūnii-a town of Wayla; Bayt ʿAynūn-a village in Iliya.
Sabra—a city in Ifriqiya; another in Barqa. Marsii al-Kharaz; Marsii al-Hajjiimin; Marsii al-Hajar; Marsa al-Dajiij-towns in al-Maghrib.
Kharrāra-a village in Fars; a town in Tahart. p. 30 Kal—towns in IfrIqiya, al-Mashriq, and Fars.
Juwaym Abi Ahmad—a town, and the village Juwaym—in Fars.
Qustantiniyya, fhtsantiniya, Qastiliya-towns in al-Maghrib; al-Qastal, a village on the borders of al-Sham.
MaCarrat al-Nu'mān, and MaCarrat Qjnnasrin, two towns in al-Sham.
A/-Lajjūn—two towns of this name in al-Sham.
. There is Thaghr (The Frontier Town) of Tarsūs; and on the coast of al-Sham, Antarsūs (Antartūs).
Dār al-Balāt—in the metropolis of the Romaeans; Balāt Marwān—a town in al-Andalus; Iliya is also called al-Balāt.
Wādi al-Qurā in al-Hijaz; Wādi al-Rummān in al-Andalus, as is also Wādi ‘1-Hijāra.
27
AN ACCOUNT OF NAMES AND THEIR DIVERSITIES
Baniyas—a town, and Banas, a river near Dimashq; Baysan—a town in al-Urduunn.
Al-Ruha—a town in AthOr; Wadi ’1-Ruha—a town in Ifnqiya.
Some towns have more than one name: for example,
Makka, Bakka;
al-Madina, Yathrib, Tayba, Taba, Jabira, Misklna, Mahbnra, Yandar, al-Dar, Dar al-Hijra;
Bayt al-Maqdis, Iliya, al-Quds, al-Balat;
CUman, Suhar, Mazon;
CAdan, Samaran, al-Sarra, al-Hays; al-Bahrayn, Hajar;
Jur, FlrOzabadh;
Nasa, al-Baydhaʾ.
Three capital cities are called Shahrastan—Jurjan, Sabnr, and Kath. There are capitals called by the names of their districts, and have names other than these also, for example, Bukhara, Naysabnr, and Misr.
Some referents are variously named among the inhabitants of the regions; for example:
lahham١jaz,zar١ qassāb, abihery
kursuf, Cutb, qutn, cotton;
qattan, hallaj) a cleaner or spinner of cotton;
a^l-^lia^z^z^a^z^^n, al-karabisiiyyin, a^l^-^i^a^lta^d^i^nai, ^e٢tnen drapers,
لآ ٠ ؟ jabban١tabbakh١baqqal١fami, tajiry afoodvendory mizah١mirzab١mizrab١mathab١ a drainpipe, bāgillān,f٥l ,beans, qidr, buma, an earthenware pot; mawqida, athafi, fireplace; zinbil١miktal, qtuffa, a basket^ sifl, mirkan, ijna, taghar, a washbasin; qintar, buhar, a (varying) weight; mann, ratl, a (varying) weight; habba, tassūj) a grain weight;
khadim, qayyim, mufanik, ballan, a bathhouse attendant;
shamshak, sandal, a sandal;
hisn, qafCa,quhandifealāt١afortress١
sa^ib rabʿ١ sa^ib r^a^؛^lat^ai١ sa^ib maslaha١sa^ib a^l^^t^a^^.1, ataxteo١١ectory
Cashshar, makkas, marsadi, a collector of customs;
mukhasim, khasim, a litigant;
hakim, qadhi, a judge;
wakiljari, a deputy;
28	THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
shayraj, salit, oil of sesame;
zajjāj, qawāriri, a glassmaker;
saf, sakk, striking on the neck;
buqʿ^a, mawdhiʿ, ة p١ace١
qitta, sinnawr, dimma, hirra, a cat;
^uʿallim, khādim١us،ādh١ shaykh١khasl,aneunuch',
dhbāgh١sarrām١ad^^ī١sikhtiyā^i١jul٥dī١ aVannery
fa<il) rūzkārī, a labourer;
qarayatt, rustagi, sawadt, ة rustic,
zarr^١fallah١harrath, لآ farmery
funduq, khān١ tim, dar	an hntr,
mirzaba, akla, a mattock;
habl, qals, a rope;
watad, kanūrā, a stake;
haddanaha, karkaraha, he dispersed them;
liss, mashūshā, robber;
janahat, walajat, it bent under the burden;
unqidha, zawira, to collapse;
qijhala, whof!.
hayārā,jamā<a, a company, community;
lakishā, kathir, much;
zarnūq, dūlab, hannana, a waterwheel;
daliya, karma, a grapevine;
mishat, ^^jr^faة ١ spade,
miʿwal, fals, a hatchet;
sā^idan١ ziqafan, upstream,
munhadiran, shibālan, downstream;
tarūs, shartah, a favourable wind;
sukkan, rijl) a rudder;
rubbān, ra<s, a captain of a ship;
mallāh, nūti, a sailor;
sāhil, shatt, a shore;
ruq<a, bitaqa, a letter, document;
rawha, nafasa, a breeze;
safina, jasūs, zawraq, raqqiyya, talawwā, <irdās, tayyār, zabzab, kārawāniyya, muthallatha, wāsittyya, ma^lq^ū^l^ai, shankultyya, buraktyya, khayttyya, shamūt, ؟. St	musabbahtyya, jcbalryya, makktyya, zabarbadhtyya, ^atrk:ai١ sūqiyya, ma^bar,
waljjtyya, tayra, l>a^r<^a^r»،؛١^liail)t^q١markab١shadhan, b^rma١ qarib, duwij, hamama, shini, shalandi, biraja, boats [of different kinds, sizes, functions].
Similar instances are abundant, and were we to include them all our book would be unreasonably lengthened. However, we will speak, for every region, in the dialect of its inhabitants, debate them on their own terms, quote some of
29
AN ACCOUNT OF NAMES AND THEIR DIVERSITIES
their proverbs, so that their language, and the particular methods of their jurisprudents may become generally known. Whenever we are treating of matters other than the regions themselves, as for instance in these chapters, we use the language of al-Sham [Syria], because it is my native region, and I was reared in it; and I dispute according to the system of al-Qadhl Abu al-Husayn al-Qazwini, because he was the first Imam under whom I studied. You will notice the elegance of our style in treating of the region of al-Mashriq, since they of all people use the purest Arabic, having earnestly studied the language in acquiring it from others. Then again look at the pallid style ofour language when we treat of al-Misr and al-Maghrib, and the wretchedness of it in our dealing with al-Bataʾih, for it is the speech of the people. Indeed we have aimed in this book only at giving information and definition, not to express emulation or rivalry. You should know, moreover, that I have decided the questions arising from this science in terms of accepted and approved usage, and with full discretion, just as jurists apply the rules in the treatise on al-Mukatib [negotiated selftenfranchisement ofa slave], and that on Oaths. We have, moreover, arranged the work according to the methods of the schools of the people of al-ʿIrāq, because it is those I have studied and those I prefer. I have also used reasoning by analogy where it seemed good and fitting-but by God is all success granted!
An Account ofthe Distinctive Features ofthe Regions
The fairest of the regions is al-ʿIrāq. The climate is most cheering to the heart, p. 33 invigorating to the mind. There, the heart feels better, the mind clearer-as long as one has a sufficiency of means. The most sublime of the regions, that most abundant in fruits, the most prolific in learned men and illustrious persons, the most noted for the coldness of its climate, is al-Mashriq.
The richest in wool, silk, and revenue in proportion to its size is al-Daylam. The region that is best for milk and honey, has the most delicious bread, the strongest saffron, is al-Jibal. The region that is the most abundant in fruits and meats, the cheapest in prices, and with the dullest people, is al-Rihab. The most wretched people, the vilest, from top to bottom, are those of Khozistan. The sweetest dates, the most abject people are those of Kirman. The area most abundant in sugar candy, rice, musk, and unbelievers [camphor?] is al-Sind. The region with the smartest people, and traders, but the most sinful is Fllrs. The place with the most heat, drought, date palms is the Peninsula of the Arabs. The region endowed with most blessings, upright people, ascetics, and shrines is al-Shllm. The region most abounding in worshippers, Readers of the {hlriin, with resources, trade, special products, and grains, is Misr. The region with the most dreaded roads, the finest horses, the most generous people, is Aqūr. The region with the coarsest, most lumpish, most fraudulent people, and which has the largest number of towns, and the most extensive area, is al-Maghrib.
ʿAbd al-Rahman, son of the brother of al-AsmaʿI narrates: “I went to see al-Jahiz and said, ‘Give me some useful insights into cities.’ Said he: ‘The endowments of the capitals are ten: chivalry in Baghdad, eloquence in al-Kūfa, manufacture in al-Basra, commerce in Misr, treachery in al-Rayy, harshness in Naysabūr, avarice in Marw, boasting in Balkh, and craftsmanship in Samarqand.”’ And upon my life, he told the truth! However, in Naysabūr, as well, there are skilled craftsmen, commerce in al-Basra, eloquence in Makka, ingenuity in Marw. San'ilʾ has an agreeable climate, Bayt al-Maqdis is well constructed; while Sughar and Jurjlln are places of pestilence. Damascus has many streams, Sughd extensive woods, al-Ramla delicious fruits, Tabaristan persistent rains, Farghana has low prices; al-Marwa and al-Juhfa, the home of the licentious. Al-Raqqa is a place of dangers; Hamadhan and TinnIs, the p. 34 abode ofthe well-born. Al-Sham is the region ofthe best people, and Samarqand the place of assembly of merchants. Naysllbflr is the city of the noble people, and al-Fustllt the most populous of the capitals. Blessed are the people of al-Gharj in the justice of their Shar (ruler); the people of Isfahan with their climate, their dress, and their earthenware. The customs in ShIraz are a blemish on Islllm; ʿAdan is the vestibule of al-Sin, also Suhar. In al-Saghllniyan are pasturage,
AN ACCOUNT OF THE DISTINCTIVE FEATURES OF THE REGIONS 31 fruits, and birds; and Bukhara would be splendid were it not for its water and frequent conflagrations. Balkh is the treasury of jurisprudence, having also spaciousness and prosperity; Iliya suits both those who are religious, and those who care for the things of this world. The people of Baghdad are short-lived, while Sancaʾ and Naysabor are the reverse of this.
Nowhere are the popular preachers in greater number, or more degraded than in Naysabnr; nor are any people more avaricious than the people of Makka, no poorer people than the people of Yathrib, none more virtuous than the people ofBayt al-Maqdis. There are none more civil than the people ofHarat and Biyar, none more intelligent than those of al-Rayy, none more proficient than the people of Sijistan; no people are more fraudulent than the people of ʿUman, nor any more ignorant than the people of ؛Amman. No people have more correct weights and measures than are used by the inhabitants of al-Koff and ʿAskar Mukram. None are more handsome than the people of Hims and Bukhara, none uglier than the people of Khwarazm, and no better looking beards are there than those of the men of al-Daylam. No greater tipplers of wine are there than the people of Ba٩abekk and Misr, no more wanton than the people of Slraf; nor are any more rebellious than the people of Sijistan and Damascus, nor any more riotous than the people of Samarqand and al-Shash. None are more docile than the people ofMisr, none more obtuse than those of al-Bahrayn, none more foolish than the people ofHims. None are more refined than the people of Fasa, Nabulus, then of al-Rayy, and above all Baghdad. None have fairer speech than the people of Baghdad, none ruder than that of Sayda and Harat. No speech is more correct than that of Khurasan, no Persian speech more beautiful than that of the people of Balkh and al-Shash. No speech is more incorrect than that of the people of al-Bata’ih. None are more pure of heart than the people of Haytal, none more gracious than those of Gharj al-Shar.
Now, suppose someone asked: “Which town is the best?” Such a question p. 35 may be answered thus. Should he be one seeking the advantages of both worlds, he should be told, Bayt al-Maqdis. Ifhe were virtuous, and free of covetousness, he should be told, Makka.
Addition/version MS. c.
[A reader’s notation in the margin at this passage reads]:
The author’s statement that Makka is to be recommended to one who is free of ambition, and his previous statement that none are more covetous than the inhabitants of Makka, do not necessarily involve a contradiction. What he says here is copying from others, whereas what he says above is his own opinion.
The true statement is in that which he copied, for what he said before has the appearance of falsehood, and indeed that is exactly what it is. Of course, judgments change with times, individuals, temperaments, and perceptions.
Were he one who seeks pleasures and possessions, low prices and fruits, he should be told, "Every town will serve you.
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
32
Addition/version MS. c .
Should his interest be fixed on this world, and the accumulation of wealth, then Misr, or ʿAdan, or CUman may be recommended. If his quest is after waters and fruits, then every place the name of which ends in “-an” may be recommended to him.
Otherwise, you may choose from among five major cities-Dimashq, al-Basra, al-Rayy, Bukhara, and Balkh; or from among five citie^Qaysāriyya, Ba'aynatha, Khujanda, al-Dlnawar, and Nnqan; or from among five districts-al-Sughd, al-Saghaniyan, Nihawand, JazIrat Ibn ʿUmar, and Sabiir. Choose whichever you wish from among them, for they are the pleasure gardens of Islam." As for al-Andalus, it is said to be a paradise; however, the bountiful gardens of this world are four: Ghnta Dimashq, the river of al-Ubulla, the meadows of al-Sughd, and Shiʿb (valley) of Bawwan. One interested in commerce has a choice among ʿAdan, CUman, Misr.
Whenever we mention some of the faults attributable to the inhabitants of different countries, the scholars, litterateurs, and especially the jurisprudents are excepted from our remarks, for I have seen their excellent qualities for myself. You should know that in the case of every town in the name of which the p. 36 letter siid occurs, the inhabitants are stupid, with the exception of al-Basra. Addition/version MS. c.
[A reader’s rubric in the margin at this passage reads]:
Influence of the spelling of the names on the temperaments of the natives of the places named.
If two letters siid occur together, as in al-MassIsa or Sarsar, then may God preserve us! For any town the name of which is used in attribution to a person born there, and the letters ziiy and yii occur together in the attributed name, the person thus named will be subtle; for example, the person from al-Rayy (RazI), the person from Marw (MarwazI), the person from Sijistan (SijizI). Every town the name of which ends in an has some special quality or excellence, for instance Jurjan, Mnqan, Arrajan. In every country in which the cold is severe the people are inclined to be more fat and stout, are more handsome and have thicker beards, for example Farghana, Khwarazm, and ArmIniyya. Every town that is on the seacoast or by a river seethes with fornication and pederasty, such as SIraf, Bukhara, and ʿAdan. Every town that lies among rivers has turbulence and unrest in its population, such as Dimashq, Samarqand, al-SalIq. Every town that is extensive and opulent offers limited means of livelihood, excepting Balkh.
You should know that Baghdad was formerly a splendid city, but is now falling into ruin and disorder, its splendour departed. I did not find it agreeable, nor anything to admire in it; if I have praised it, it is only in conventional terms.
Fustat of Misr is today as Baghdad was of old; and I do not know in Islam a town more splendid than it. As for the region of al-Mashriq, because of the spread of tyranny there, it has declined from what it was, though it is still better
AN ACCOUNT OF THE DISTINCTIVE FEATURES OF THE REGIONS 33 than the others. The non-Arab regions are not to the liking of the people who live lower down; but if al-Ramla had but a stream of running water we should consider it, without exception, the most pleasant town in Islam. It is a delightful place, and lively, set in the midst of holy ground and fortresses, between low-lying land and the sea. The climate is equable, the fruits delicious, the people high-minded, though uninformed. It is the storehouse of Misr, the entrepot of the two seas, and, in all, a comfortable and prosperous place. Addition/version MS. c .
. . . and in short, the best places are those in which there is an abundance of good things, even should such a place be but a village.
p. 37	An Account ofthe Madhahib
[Schools of Islamic Law] and the Dhimma [Free Non-Muslim Subjects]
You should know that the madhiihib (doctrinal schools-sing. madhhab) recognized in the realm of Islam at present, that have private and public places of assembly, or are missionary, or are congregational in character are twenty-eight in number. Of these, four deal with jurisprudence, four with theology, four with the correlations between these two, four that have fallen into desuetude, four concerned with Tradition (hadlth), four have been taken over by another four, and four are present in rural areas.
Schools ofJurlsprudence: al-Hanafiyya, al-Malikiyya, al-Shafaʿwiyya, al-DllwOdiyya. Schools ofTheology: al-Muʿtazila, al-Najjariyya, al-Kullabiyya, and al-Slllimiyya. Schools Having Both Fiqh (Jurisprudence) and Kal^m (Theology).. a١-ShIʿa١ al-Khwarij (The Revolters), al-Karramiyya, and al-Batiniyya.
Schools ofAdherents to Tradition: al-Hanbaliyya, al-Rllhwiyya, al-Awzllʿiyya, and al-Mundhiriyya.
Schools Fallen Into Desuetude: aJ-ʿAta’iyya, al-Thawriyya, al-Iblldhiyya, and al-Taqiyya.
Schools Only in RuralAreas: al-Zaʿfaraniyya, al-Khurramdlniyya, al-Abyadhiyya, al-Sarakhsiyya.
Schools Taken Over by Four Analogous to Them: al-Kullabiyya by al-Ashʿariyya, al-Qarmatiyya by al-Batiniyya, al-Qadariyya by al-Muʿtazila, al-Zaydiyya by al-Shiʿa, al-Najjllriyya by al-Jahmiyya.
This is the entire number of the doctrinal schools that are recognized in Islam at present, but they have branched into innumerable sects. Those schools we have mentioned are known by other names and designations, which would merely be repetitions of them without increasing the number of them that we have given: this fact is well known to scholars.
Four schools have an agnomen; four, a laudatory appellation; four, a designation ofdisavowal; four are variously defined. Four names are given in reproach to those concerned with tradition; four are identical in meaning; and four there are among which only the well-versed can differentiate.
Agnomen: al-Rawafidh (Rejecters), al-Mujbira (Predestinators), al-Murjiʾa (Procrastinators), al-Shukkllk (Doubters).
Laudatory: Ahl al-ʿSunna wal-Jamllʿa, followers of the precedents and communal authority; Ahl al-ʿAdl wal-Tawhld, those who profess the justice and unity of God; al-Muʾminon, the believing; and Ashab al-Hudll, the rightly guided.
Disavowal: al-Kullabiyya, who disavow divine constraint on man; al-Hanbaliyya, disavowed for their hatred of ʿAlI; those who do not recognize
35
AN ACCOUNT OF THE MADHAIB AND THE DHIMMA
the attributes of God, and are disavowed because of their anthropomorphism; and those who disavow all. the attributes of God.
Variously Defined: According to al-Karramiyya, al-Jabr (compulsion) implies the identification of the capacity to act with the doing of the act itself; while according to al-Muʿtazila evil is foreordained by the power of God-may He be exalted—and the actions of men are said to be the creations of God. As for al-Murjiʾa, they are those, according to Ahl al-Hadith [those who claimed that formal traditions of the Prophet Muhammad superseded other current community traditions], who consider works as secondary to faith; while according to al-Karrāmiyya, they are those who deny the statutory obligation of works. Again, according to al-Maʾmuniyya, they are those who waver in their position on the faith; while according to Ashab al-Kalam, they are those who are indeterminate in their position on those who commit grievous sins, and do not admit of an intermediate position. As for al-Shukkak (the Doubters), they are those who, according to Ashab al-Kalām, waver in respect of the Quriin, while according to al-Karramiyya, they are those who qualify the declaration of faith. Then al-Rawafidh (the Rejecters) are those who, according to al-Shīʿa, put the Khilūfū [office or rule of khalif] of ʿAlI lower in order of occurrence; while according to all others, they are those who deny the Khiliifa of Abo Bakr, and of ʿUmar.
The four schools that are the same in meaning are al- Zaʿfarāniyya, al-Waqifiyya, al-Shukkak, and al-Rustll.qiyya.
The four names given in reproach to Ahl al-HadIth are: al-Hashwiyya [accepting some anthropomorphic traditions], al-Shukkak, al-Nawll.sib [detesters of ʿAlI, dogmatically], and al-Mujbira [deniers of free will in man].
Those that are differentiated by the well-versed only are Ahl al-HadIth as distinct from al-Shaftawiyya, al-Thawriyya from al-Hanafiyya, al-Najjāriyya from al-Jahmiyya, and al-Qadariyya from al-Muʿtazila.
You should know that all the schools of the Muslims have branched from an original four, al-Shīʿa, al-Khawll.rij, al-Murjiʾa, and al-Muʿtazila: the basis of their disunion was the murder of ʿUthman. They further ramified and will continue in disunion until the emergence of al-MahdI [a ruler who shall in the last days appear upon the earth—Hughes, Diet. Islam]. In this context, the Irja> (deferral) is the refusal to take a position on those who have grievously sinned, and the Ahl al-Raʾy [people of subjective opinion—followers of the madhhab of Abu HanIfa] and the Ahl al-HadIth [followers of tradition—the madhiihib of Malik, al-ShafiʿI, and Ibn Hanbal] also share in this position. The Muʿtazila say that every Mujtahid [a doctor of law who exerts himself to the full in reaching an opinion on a legal question] is correct in the applied fiqh (jurisprudence) only; and their assertion derives from some people who were uncertain about the position of the Qjbla [direction-towards the Kaʿba-— which Muslims turn in prayer], in the time of the Prophet-God’s peace and blessings be upon him—and of whom each turned in prayer in a different direction. He did not
p. 3S
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
36
command those who were in error to repeat their prayers, but rather put them on the same footing as those who had been correct. And this point pleases me very much, for, do you not see, the Companions of the Prophet—God's peace and blessings be upon him-hava differed among themselves, but he said that their differences were an act of divine providence, for, said he: “Whichever one among them you follow, you will be rightly guided." Moreover, Sufyan bin ʿUyayna has said: “Almighty God does not punish anyone for anything over which the learned disagree." Do you not see that, after all, it is as when a judge has given a verdict in a case, it is not in the power of another to set that verdict aside, even if he should consider it to be in error. However, a segment of the Karramiyya say that every Mujtahid is correct in both al- Usūl (the fundamentals) and alFurU' (the derivatives), except for the freethinkers. The originator of this opinion, which is the opinion of a group of the Murjiʾa, justifies it by a saying ascribed to the Prophet—God's peace and blessings be upon him: “My community will be divided into seventy-three sects, seventy-two will be in Paradise and one in Hell." However, all the other authorities maintain that “only those are correct who conform with righteousness, and these constitute one category of men, only." They base their argument on the other tradition, which has “seventy-two in Hell and but one to be saved." Of course, this later tradition is more generally known, although the first one rests on a more correct chain of tradition; but God knows best. In any case, if the first version is correct, then the damned sect are the Batiniyya; if the second version is the truth, then those to be saved will be the great majority of the people. For my part, I have never considered the great majority to be other than those following the four schools: the adherents of Abu HanIfa in al-Mashriq, the adherents of Malik in al-Maghrib, the adherents of al-ShafiʿI in al- Shash and the libraries of Naysabor, and the traditionists in al-Sham, Aqor, and al-Rihab. As for the other regions, they represent an intermixture, and I have made this clear in the account of the regions as shown in this book.
As for the modes of reading [the Quran] in use at the present time, these are four in number: the system of the people of al-Hijaz, comprising, in turn, four: the reading ofNafiʿ, that oflbn Kathir, that ofShayba, and that of Abo Jaʿfar; the system of the people of al-ʿIraq, containing, likewise, four: the reading of ʿĀsim, that of Hamza, that of al-KisāʾI, and that of Abu ʿAmr. The reading used by the people of al-Sham is that of ʿAbd Allah bin ʿĀmir. Then there are the systems of individuals, being four in number: the reading of Yaʿqub al-Hadhrami, the Selection of Abu ʿUbayd, the Selection of Abo Hatim, and the reading of al-Aʿmash. The majority of the doctors agree that all of these are in the right. For my part, of the schools, I have chosen to follow that of Abu HanIfa, may God have mercy on him, for the characteristics which I mention in the account of the region of al-ʿIraq; and of the systems of reading the Quran, I prefer that of Abo ʿlmran ʿAbd-Allah bin ʿĀmir al-Yahsabl, for the reasons I give in the account of the region of Aqor.
p. 39
JO UOJUBJBpap ؛٧U3٧U؛UBdlU033B U0^؛l٩0 IJ3B3 3u؛٧٥A3p ۵0īra؛UO؛ اا31 es^؛JO 3u UUOUJ pauajjip ااأ3 od moj uo BXXiuuguuE){ aqu JO jooqos؛s٧u: ااأ3 u٧3٧؛ss؛atpjo u٥ J/Cvqq 7٠-JPIU٠١--؛؛sip OJ 3UU03 ٧S3٩ SqUOM JO؛؛] ؛OABIJ auuog •J3^B٧d OJ IJED sip u p JO JOB؛33JOA؛ اا31 ٩٩nj؛3u اا31 ل33ا؛ pUB اا31 vp/vtf [؛u اا31 PP) pMpR 33UEU3٧٧n أبموEjiqs ؛sjoadsaj unoj u: ااأ3 امء؛ ااأ3 aqujo Xdbdijjo j٧؛3jd pnd3٧؛٧B؛uo ؛u ااأ3 J3AO puvq ااأ3 uv٩un٧‘ ااأ3 ^p OABIJ auuog BXXitulJJB؛UUOUJ p3J3JJ اا31 J٧30p؛JO 3U اا31 nut/(.‘ اا31 Ejjqs؛ uo اا31 ٧nj٩B؛A\ uo؛puBS M٧‘ ءل-ةلأةلال1؛ uo puB ااأ3 SuiMBup ااأ3 ااأ3 ٠٩v ‘jautginEj aqu JO U3UUBUU uujq Moqs pory ĀBUU-BJIUBH ٧لأ3ل3د؛ atripuEbou A\ paauhe OABIJ sdnoaS unoj؛uo :suauuBtu unoj asaqu JO uaquo JO 3UO uo ‘asoqu M٧ puB ااأ3 nu„؛٧nj٩B aqujo Xdbdijjo aqujo au؛uo ؛jnp auopj؛‘J3A3M0JJ uauqānBi 3u ٧nj٩B؛A\ SUO؛3J31JM puBS JO jsnp M٧ اا31 J3٧EM JO asn ؛٧OU s SB3J؛A\ [3J٩؛puBS M٧؛
؛u اا31 UOUU3J33؛٧nd JB؛٧B3IJ؛u٥]؛ M0„B JOU؛aU اا31 mtimmp/(pj [اا31 JO ^UOUU3J33 SuiMBup ااأ3 J3AO puvq ااأ3 ٧s٩ns OJ aanusaS B sc] UB٩un٧؛3M JOJ 3,n٧„؛3u ااأ3 pvaq p3MO„B ؛u ااأ3 ,^JOUIW JO naiu ق؛ل3ل؛٧لأءة3] jnp؛3u ااأ3 ffvR (ق؛ل3ل؛٧لأءة3)؛
JO jootgts ااأ3 pBU٧؛٧؛UO؛S٧S ؛sjujod unoj u: اا31 ٧BXBJ3U sip] V)}ntu؛J٧S3J JO U0؛٧3؛SUO suoponpaj iBuopjodoud] jatVrP ؛auuos u UUOUJ pajJBdap auuos Js٧s3nb3٩ ااأ3 JOU Abuu (anbsouu) pifsnut 33J 3٩؛udooxa pa٧ ؛u ااأ3 puB {.ptfsvM ؛u ااأ3 JO uopsanb JO JJBIJ اا31 3٧B٧S3؛ uvqu اا31 I OlJAt 3UO JO sua^vud؛S3A ؛u اا31 3u؛B JO pooqjo٩q3 suauuBtu unoj: ااأ3 ۵jbuu؛M unoj uvqu 3JOUU 3u؛S3A؛ MO٧s3٩؛Sj3٧q3ncp OMU uo 3u لاpBUUBاlةudaoxa ‘u الا SEN؟• UUOUJ pajJBdap OABIJ auuog ااأ3 JO jootgts ٥؟P٠M ؛u 3٩ PJBS ؛SJ3٩U٧nU ppo u‘ اا1ل33ء U3A3S JO ،3AIJ]‘ ؛uvqu uatpo u اا31 JOJIgu U3UUBJ puB ؛u ااأ3 U٧0؛SS؛JO U0 ااأ3 iddns؛٧B3؛uo ؛٧3٩iunu ppo,,] Jjtat u؛؛-OJ s٧3^B٧d \A؛M٧ ااأ3 poQ—Jvqqv nifPUV»] Vdtqqpj ؛JSOUU s جل3ءا؛؛]اUB ااأ3 33٩؛uu؛JO 3u كه3ل؛ ss3٧dx3؛JO U٥ اا31 JO UOJUBJBpap] VlClU اا31 ل؛جا1ا؛uopuaju ؛UUBOI{ S(3UO u] ا0ة٧3ا31ل ااأ3 ٧3^B٧d] inunb iddns JO؛٧B3؛SuipuBjs pauauun ‘uo]‘ ؛u ااأ3 ujouu؛٧3^B٧d 3u؛ ااأ3 udaoxa ؛Jt(SBj^-iB u؛b ؛u ااأ3 JO sanbsouu ااأ3 suuauaqpv اه ء1-ةلأةؤ,ل؛ ؛JO uoadssj u augtunouotd ؛OA pnoj B u؛33 JO ااأ3 ؛٧B3٥AU؛JO uo ااأ3 ‘[qpilttustq] pory JO auuBU ااأ3 ؛A3p OABIJ auuog yuBJOua؛UUOUJ p3٧B ااأ3 IjIJSMSIBJO ajnj ؛suauuBtu moj u: ااأ3 ٧BpnBj؛mp pory JO suo؛3u ااأ3 ٧B٧٧soud pile SMO٩؛٧3^B٧d JO suo‘ SuotuB udaoxa po.؛؛]‘ jdaoxa ؛B٧U33 u؛JO SB3UB U ء1-لاأ3ا1ل؛٩؛ pile ؛u اا31 UUJ3d؛SS؛SS3U3A ؛u اا31 A\ aq 33B3d :tfPJlv lPutqpj vat tunq/Cvp) rmpps-p))؛puB ‘no^ M٧ ااأ3 ٧لأ3ل3د JO ذءااأل؛٩؛ uy؛tjs؛A\ sua^vud 3u؛M٧ ؛bs] mtjsvi 3UO usn^؛3u ااأ3 p3U3٩؛٧3؛(uo I٧3J33S^‘ ؛u ااأ3 ٩buu؛puB UB3UU JO ahewod] vsuvif JO 3u nq3un٩)] ؛J^ u؛puB JS 3 OMU؛٧؛S3 ؛٥ 3J31JM qiiljScWf اا31 3JBS ؛٧3Bjd UJ3A0 UB s؛33) S٧I pUB ؛SnpU؛(UO ؛٥ W؛pile (JS ااأ3 sjeaunj UB sua^vud ؛uugqs-jB u؛ ٧B3؛3u ااأ3 SABS ‘sSop JO t{S3٧ ؛u ٥d؛cjd :OSJB s٧u^؛3u ؛JO UUOUJ u ااأ3 udaoxa uuguuj ؛u ءل-لالء3األ؛٩ا s^Bpjuj uo puB or d ؛puB gugqqng u ءل-لاهد• A3p OABI{ atuog؛UUOUJ p3٧B ااأ3 .unoj uo !11 JO sajnu aqujo UB tuosjsd BJO ^po٩ ااأ3 ٧؛ipeapjo 3U٧؛ pile ااأ3 i٩o؛٧b3؛J3BS JO uo؛udaoxa ‘33IJ UgXig pUB؛ uo اا31 A3J XBU SUUJB؛sasuoq uo p3؛ اا31 U٥؛٧B٧U3؛SpjBMOU] UO اا31 [VjqtQ ل٧لأ٧لأ0لءا؛٧0أ uo ااأ3 JO ^cp quuau ااأ3 niia JO quuouu H-I٠؛]]udaoxa ‘[e ؛pi٩BZ u ٩B3jg؛JO 3u ااأ3 U3UJB (JSBJ ااأ3 JO pus ااأ3 npeuu٩jo quuouu؟puB ‘u ااأ3 JO JSB3J od moj uo BJIUBH؛uo :S٧U اا31 JO SUO^BUd اا31 ٧S3J OMU؛S(BA [اا31 JO JBAIUSOJ اا31 ^A3p OABI{ ajdoad auuos uvqu Mouq pjnoqs no؛UUOUJ p3٧B ااأ3 igtB3٧؛Q٩v JO 3u
VWWIHQ 3HL QNV aiYHQVW 3HL JO LNOOOOV NV
if
أق3 sues/ U3A3SJ0؛ u sip؛JO Sjtep pUB s٧l٠3 ٧ا31 ام٩33 3،3 3UBا1 U3A3S؛ ٧ا31 3|؛S3٧BU1 UIJV UB؛] SUB ؛Z٧3A3 u ؛SupSBJ U3A3S 33UĪUSU ؛٩0 s|؛ة؟٧0٧/ 3UO UO ل3؟3ا1؛لة ٧ا31 [U33M٧a٩ ؟1-SJS ؟pUB ‘[BAUBJV1B pu ٧ا31 ٩٩ad|٧SB3 S3 [٧b ٧ا31 ٧ا1لوو d؛||SUB ٩؛U3A3S SUB uokid JO spu؛ ٧اأ3 3؛٧B|n٩UUBUin3J؛sip jo] SUO ي٠١،ل٩،]ء ٧ا31 uun٧؛s3u USAOSUOJ^‘ ٧ا31 U3A3S SUB S٧3UB|d ؛U3٩umu u؛ ٧ا31 jd؛3U؛0! |،d؛U3A3S SUB s٧u؛ ٧ا31 '3 'SW UOtSJia/UOtJtppy
ipnou ااأ3 punoaS ؛٧B٧٧soud injiaXcid u؛U3A3S 3JE [uo؛؛؛
UMop uuas SBM ؛uvqu puB XatripuoM U3A3S u ااأ3 ptfvsviu [ااأ3 aqujo SJJBd po٩^ ٧}٧Bl UBip ‘U3A3S pUB U3A3S اا31 A0jd؛S؛U3A3S JO 3JE UBUUJO SU0 ٩؛spu؛ UPftnQ aqu uvqu اا31 pUB SU3AB31J اا31 apvuu pUB ‘U3A3S pUB U3A3S M٧UB3 اا31 pUB s^cp اا31 u؛3)s٧l dnoj3؛Xjoa Mouq otjAt no^ (s3u س3لل uvqu po٥—ل3اH؛p3٧B3J^p3٧iBX3 aq auuBU S ٩buu uno^ Aq sajnj؛dnoj3 OvuuauBnb 3u؛OABIJ no^ puB s3u 3٧؛Ovuaudas p3٧33 A\؛Mouq XiiBJOuaā ajdoad UBIJM M٧؛ pauaABJUuoo OABIJ no^ puB ااأ3 IBUuaurepunj Sujsoddns ؛٧ pjnoqs BS 3٩؛٧soj^„ :p UMop J3S noX UBIJM JO ؛JBA UB puB ‘SSJBJ s؛33UB ٧3adS3J؛J3S3p llgus 3M pUB ‘saOBjd 3A؛3٩ اا31؛ل pUB syuauu اا31؛ل 1AsoN 'S٧33J3p unoqujM ‘pauopuauu OABIJ 3M ةءلا؛ءل؛اد3jd JO؛pn؛33) M OS pory JI؛„s‘ ؛u ااأ3؛ل M 3M ‘uuvd jno JOJ؛uuodau U ااأ3 u٧0p3jd؛sdnoaS aqujo 3UO ۵3A3 JO 33UBU اا31 ٩vg؟٠suv
JO اا31 unoj 3JE ،[a\bj: ااأ3 swaf‘ ااأ3 J٠؛٧S؛SUB) ااأ3 J٧SE0J0Z) suBihew؛puB ‘(SUB داأ3 3J!؛a؛uapun stuijsnj^-uou] muutiqp 3JE otjAt asoqujo suo ااأ3 uopoaioud J3od^q ‘^usBuapad ‘paatS :s٧3pB3١j؛duuod puB ‘^s
33U03-JJ3S؛٧‘ ssaupjo 33UB33J3 puB ‘jnouBsuuap uuapyuoo داأ3 aqujo squBiu unoj ٧BUBj؛3؛uus‘ JOJ XicSSaq puB (SS3U3SB٩ ااأ3 od moj SJ3W3J JO uauu؛jds :s٧u؛3)I٧l؛‘SS3U ٧3B؛ssaoons pUB ‘XjUBip ‘(B3Z 3A دا31 JO SqUBUU moj اا31 }(d 3JE bXXiuueuub؛‘ĀJ3 UMOUOU puB ‘^ujuadsoud داأ3 OJ suuauaqpv دpBJ؛ا؛3s :unoj OABIJ uo„؛‘aiduuBxa 3u Bjiqs aqi JO 'Oaqoouu puB ‘ssaupwaj ااأ3 3٩3J ‘pauuvq 3JE squBiu moj„؛‘ss3usno aouanyjB puB داأ3 ^nj,ZB٧؛i؛s s3٧؛uu؛٩ubj 3 :squBiu moj OABIJل3ةء٧أ33‘ ‘uuopsjM SU3M٥ll٥J p٠Mg٥J٥‘ اا31؛ل pUB٧āāB 3JE SqUBUU moj؛٧U3UU3Z‘ 3X3؛‘XUIjnUUBā ‘Ol٩B٧ U3٧3BUBq3؛٧S؛3JE S3 ؛su؛٧qā‘ p؛l٧3p٧OS؛IUBUU ‘SS3U؛Sn٩B pUB ‘SS3U؛JOJ sy 'SS3U3A اا31 j3J؛a؛moii٥j pile ‘uo؛JOJ sy -uuojsnojo 3u ااأ3 JO S٧3M٥II٥J tis-I٠؟I,y) ااأ3؛ل unoj JOJ ااأ3 JO SU3M٥II٥J الأال، اا31؛ل J3٧3BJBIJ3 moj؛٧S؛‘-Qapjdnjs ‘ssauapnjo 3JE S3 A\؛JO ^jouuauu OJ iBtritutuoo ‘uunjooap M٧ ااأ3 d puB ‘poQjo JE3J ‘ugfUnfjr؛sy '^J3 3U3UU^-٧Bq٧ ٧UBM U33S J3A3 OABIJ I؛āu ؛SJOadSB unoj u: ا1؛3ا1 p 33IJJO؛p33jBl(3S ق3س؛3JE paapu ااأ3 ؛JO susjun ااأ3 ة3أأههل q Moqs pory ĀBUU-BJIUBH 0٩v JO؛U٧ اا31 cp^‘ uasuns 3UOJ3٩؛ pUB اا31 JO āuiqSBM اا31 aauqu UOOJ ٧؛S3UU ؛u اا31 ٧ni٩B؛UO-U٥pUB٩B؛JO āu اا31 ٧3B٧d؛33 JO u٧n٧3٧؛UB EUJW UUOUJ [BqqBJV ou] āu اا31 JO pus JO s^cp اا31 JO qjuouu ق؛لةل؛11٧ءة3]؛ اا31 p333٧d U3^B٧d؛āu اا31 ٧S3J OMU؛S(BA؛ اا31 ؛٥d moj u؛s٧u: ااأ3 dtqqvj ؛u ااأ3 JO sXcp ااأ3 {buifsv [اأأ3 للاأأء لةااأء puB لعااأ اأ3 ؛BS s^؛U3A3M.H uuaqu 3u‘ ااأ3 JO SSBUU ااأ3 IJB UUOUJ JSJJIP ajdoad ااأ3 sjooqos JO auEMEun ؛٧؛ puB ااأ3 uuoqM uo auojo sua^vud aqujo ^UIPIJBA ااأ3 J tuns؛S3S سبملأو p3AJ3s٩o -Qaadoud ااأ3 USBJ ؛u ااأ3 asjuuns U3UJB U3JB3 scq OIJAS auojo 3SB3 ٧n٩ ؛s اا31 i٩o؛sua^vud ^uo٧b3 سبملأو J B uo؛p؛IBIUJUB 3u؛ اا31 ٧du٧nS3jd؛SuiABl{ JO UO
St
SNOioan 3HL JO ao٥a٦^ON^ د0لا SNOISIAia Lsaa 3HL
39
AN ACCOUNT OF THE MADHAIB AND THE DHIMMA
of the world are seven. Too, the principles to be followed in questions on the distribution of shares in bequests are seven;
and some things may be mentioned to which I will reply further. Well, the reply p. 42 to that is that I have been on my guard in this by saying the “schools that are recognized", not “the sects of the Muslims." If the facts of the matter are at variance in some instances with what we have said, this is indeed rare, and, on the whole, matters are as we have stated them.
Addition/version MS. c.
The worshippers of idols in al-Sind are not included in the Dhimma [free non-Muslim subjects in Muslim countries], for as you see, they do not render thejizya (poll-tax). As for the Majus (Mazdaeans), they are included among the Dhimma according to the command of CUmar that they be treated in the same way as the People of the Book (Jews and Christians). It should be understood that our referring to the adherents of one and the same doctrinal school by two names, one of praise and one of blame, does not at all imply an intent to commend or revile, or our part; rather, it is simply to show what others say about any doctrinal school, and the names they give them.
It’s essential then, that anyone who reads this book of ours keep his wits about him and give careful consideration to what he reads so that he will be well aware of what our intent is; otherwise he will hold our work in contempt, and, in fact, throw discredit on us.
The Samaritans are a branch of the Jews, for, as you see, their prophet is Moses, peace be upon him.
Addition/version MS. c.
It is common knowledge that Abo Hanlfa avoided theological discussion; I have observed the same of the most illustrious doctors of our own time, as Abo Bakr al-Jassas, Abo Bakr bin al-Fadhl, al-Ismāʿīll, al-Saʿwllnl, and al-ʿAqlll. I myself have heard Abu al-Husayn al-Qāzwlnl point out that while Abo Hanlfa was undoubtedly of the Murjiʾa, the majority of those ofhis followers who professed to the study of theology are Muʿtazila. If then the matter is as we say, we cannot attribute the practice of both jurisprudence and theology to Abo Hanlfa; all we can say is that of his followers, some studied theology, and some of those studying theology also studied jurisprudence.
As for the quaternary groupings, they occur naturally, and are not anything I deliberately intended. But even so, they have their parallels in the fundamental principles; for as you know the sacred Books are four [the Old Testament) the New Testament, the Book ofPsalms, die Quran] and the nature of man is of four parts,
Addttion/vcrsion MS. c.
From among the birds Abraham took four classes, every one of which he divided in four, and placed four of them on every one of four separate mountains.
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
40
(Qīrʾān, sora 2, v. 259). The great regional rivers are four, the mountains, the battlefields are each four. The towns of paradise are four, the comers of the Kaʿba are four, the sacred months are four; the days and the nights are divided into four kinds; the winds are four, the pillars of Islam, next to the declaration of faith, are four, the ritual ablution is on four members of the body; the number of witnesses required for a charge of adultery is four, sillim [immediate payment against remote delivery] contracts are lawful in only four kinds of wares, and a Muslim may not take wives more than four. The gardens of the world are four, the takbirs [saying Allahn akbar] in the burial service are four, the rightly-guided Khallfas are four, and four things there are relating to four categories that are of an obligatory nature.
the elements are four, the seasons four, the rivers four [i.e. of paradise: Nile, Euphrates, Sayhan,Jayhon], the comers of the Kaʿba four, and the sacred months are four [al-Muharram, Rajah, Dhu al-Qaʿda, Dhu al-Hijja—respectively first, seventh, eleventh and twelfth months of the Islamic year]. We have received a tradition from Abo Bakr Ahmad bin ʿAbdan, of al-Ahwaz, who had it from Muhammad bin Mu'awiya ai-AnsarI, who had it from Ismaʿil bin Sabih, who p. 43 had it from Sufyan al-Harlrl, who had it from ʿAbd al Muʾmin, who had it from Zakariyya, the father of Yahya, who had it from al-Asbagh bin Nabata, that the last-named heard ʿAlI-—ay God be pleased with him-say: “The Quriin came down, a fourth of it pertaining to us, a fourth concerning our enemies, a fourth containing histories and parables, and a fourth prescriptions and laws." So these also are fundamental principles which are not to be set aside.
NARRATIVE OF MY ACTUAL EXPERIENCES
You should know that many men of learning and ministers of state have written on this subject, even though rather deficiently, but most of them, let me say rather all of them, have done so from hearsay. However, for my part, there is not a single region I have not visited, and but few subjects with which I have not made myself acquainted. Along with this, I have not neglected making exhaustive scrutiny, observation, and enquiry, regarding matters obscure. This book of ours, then, falls into three parts: first, what I myself have witnessed; second, what I have heard from persons worthy of confidence; and third, what I have found in books devoted to this subject, and other than this. No royal library remained without my persistent examination of it, no literary works of any sect that I have not scrutinized, no people with whose opinions I have not acquainted myself; there is no group of ascetics with which I did not mingle, no preachers anywhere whose convocations I have not attended. In this way I attained to the soundness of the knowledge I strove for in this science. I have been given thirty-six names, by which I have been called and addressed; such as Muqaddasl (Jerusalemite), Filastlnl (Palestinian), Misrl (Egyptian), Maghribl (from al-Maghrib), Khurasanl (from Khurasan), Silml (from Salamiyya), Muqriʾ (reciter of the Quriin), Faqlh (jurist), Sufi (mystic), Wall (holy man), Abid (servant of God), Zahid (ascetic), Sayyah (pilgrim), Warraq (copyist), Mujallid (bookbinder), Tajir (merchant), Mudhakkir (reciter), Imam, Muʾadhdhin (the one who calls to prayer), Khatib (preacher), Gharlb (foreigner), ʿlraqi, Baghdadi, Shaml (Syrian), Hanlfi (adherent to school of Abo Hanlfa), Mutaʾaddib (scholar), Karl (employer), Mutafaqqih (jurisconsult), Mutaʿallim (learner), Faraʾidhi (notary), Ustadh (master), Danishomand (sage), Shaykh (master), Nishastah (schoolman), Rakib (rider), and Rasol (messenger): all this on account of the various countries in which I have lived, and the many places I visited. Nothing remains of what befalls travellers that did not fall to my lot, barring only begging, and the commission of grievous sin. I studied law and letters; practiced asceticism and devoutness; lectured on law and letters; preached from pulpits; made the call to prayer from minarets; officiated as Imam in the masiijid (mosques); delivered the sermons in jawiimiʿ (congregational mosques); frequented the schools. I said the prayers in convocation, spoke in councils; consumed harisa with the Sufis, tharid (broth) with the cenobites, and ʿasida [flour, butter, and honey pudding] with seamen. I was ejected in the night from mosques, have wandered in the steppes, gone astray in the deserts; at times I have been scrupulously abstinent, while again, at other times, have openly eaten forbidden foods. I have associated with the devotees of Jabal Lubnan (Mount Lebanon), also been on intimate terms with those in power. I have owned slaves,
p. 44
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
42
but have had to carry baskets on my head. A number of times I was close to drowning, and our caravans have been robbed on the highway. I have been in the service of judges and persons of distinction, have conversed with rulers and ministers. I have kept company on the road with the licentious, and sold goods in the marketplaces. I have been confined in prison, and accused as a spy; I have myself witnessed the warring of the Romaeans in warships, and the striking of bells in the night [at Christian meetings]. I have bound books for profit, bought water at high prices; have traveled in litters and on horseback; trudged in the hot sandstorms, and the snows; have frequented royal courts among noblemen, and lived among the ignorant in the weavers' quarters. To what power and rank I have attained! Yet my murder has been plotted more than once. I have made the Pilgrimage, and lived in the dependency of the mosque; I have fought in raids, when doing service at frontier posts. At Makka I have drunk sawiq (ptisan) from the public fountain, have eaten bread and chickpeas in the monasteries, been fed at the hospice of Abraham, the Friend of God, and have eaten the fruit of the wild sycamore of ʿAsqaliln. I have been invested with robes of honour by kings, and they have ordered that rich gifts be given me. I have been naked and necessitous many times. Yet distinguished people have corresponded with me, and the illustrious have reprimanded me. I have been given the responsibility of administering religious endowments, and have had to submit to blackguards. Heresy has been imputed tome, and I have been accused ofcovetousness. Princes p. 45 and QadhIs have elevated me to positions of trust, my name has been entered into bequests, and I have been made an executor. I have had dire experience of pickpockets, and seen firsthand the artifices of scoundrels. Miscreants have hounded me, the envious opposed me, I have been slandered before the rulers. I have entered the baths ofTabariyya and the fortresses ofPersia; I have witnessed the Festival of al-Fawwilra (the Fountain) and the Feast ofBarbilrah [celebrated December 4th], also visited the Well of Budhilʿah, the castle ofJacob, and his villages.
Experiences of this kind are abundant, and I have mentioned as many as I have, that the reader of my book may perceive that I did not compile it haphazardly, nor arrange it in random fashion; he will thus be able to distinguish it above others, for, after all, what a difference there is between one who has personally undergone all these experiences, and one who has compiled his book at his ease, merely basing it on the reports of others. I have spent in these journeyings of mine more than ten thousand dirhams, without taking into the reckoning my shortcomings in the observance of my religious obligations. For there is not a license permitted by any school of which I did not take advantage; thus, I have simply rubbed over the feet, have fulfilled my prayers by saying mudhiimmatiini (QurJiin, sOra 55, v. 64), have departed [from Minil for Makka] before the going down of the sun, have said the obligatory prayers while in the saddle, and while having foul filth on my clothes. There has been omission of the tasbih (glorification of God) in the rukū (bowing) and the sujūd (prostration),
43
NARRATIVE OF MY ACTUAL EXPERIENCES
and I made the prostrations of inadvertence [as a penance] before the salutation. I have joined a number of prayers together at the same time, and have fallen short in my devotions even when not traveling. Even so, I did not depart from the canons of the leading jurisprudents, and I never at any time deferred a prayer to a time beyond that appointed for it. In fact, whenever I was traveling on the highway, and there remained a distance of ten farsakhs or less between me and a town, I would leave the caravan and make my way thither, that I might see it before the others. Indeed sometimes I employed some men to accompany me, making any journey at night so as to get back to my companions, and this at a cost to me of money and tribulation.
Report of Places 1 which Accounts Diifer
p. 46
You should know that in the realm of Islam are places and shrines the locations of which have not been exactly established, so there is no agreement on them. It is necessary to devote a separate chapter to them so that the reality [of other sites] may be distinguished; we will thus avoid the topic when we mention the places in the accounts of the various regions.
In Kazarun is a dome beside the pass, which the Magians assert is the middle of the world; a festival in its honour is celebrated every year.
Outside Yanbuʿ, towards the sea, is a sacred spot said to be the tongue of the earth, in its uttering, “We come willingly." (Quran, sura 41, v. 11).
At al-Jashsh is a place where, it is said, was the chain of David, used for establishing the certitude of evidence.
Some have said that the grave of Adam is near by the minaret of the mosque of al-Khayf, others have said that it is near the grave of Abraham; others again that it is in al-Hind, others yet that it is in the desert; a man in Iliya asserts that he saw in a dream that it is behind Jabal Zayta (Mount Olivet).
The People of the Book (Jews and Christians] say that the grave of David is in Sihyawn (Zion); some have said that the cities of Lot were between Kirman and Khurasan; some have maintained that the fire of Abraham was at Jarmaq. According to some, the platform at al-Gharl is the tomb of Nuh (Noah).
ʿAll is entombed in the mihrūb [niche in the center of wall, marking the direction of Makka] of the great mosque of al-Kofa, but, according to others, beside the leaning tower. According to some, Fatima is buried as is the Prophet-God's peace and blessings be upon him—in the Hujra (chamber), or, some say in al-Baqlʿ [a cemetery in al-Madlna].
Outside Marw, and towards Sarakhs, is a hospice wherein is a small tomb said to be that ofthe head of al-Husayn, the son of ʿAll. In Farghana is said to be the tomb of Ayyub (Job). On the summit of Mount Slna [Sinai] is an olive tree said to be the one “neither of the east, nor of the west." (Quran, sora 24, v. 35); on Mount Zayta is another of which the same is said.
According to some the Rock of Moses is in Sharwan; they say that the sea is the Lake of Tabaristan (Caspian); that the village of Bajarwan and the killing of the youth occurred in a place near the village of Khazaran. (Quran, sora 18, vv. 60-81).
Some say the rampart of Yajuj and Majuj (Gog and Magog) is beyond al-Andalus; others say it is at the mountain pass of Khazaran, and that Gog and Magog are the Khazars. (Quran, sura, 18, vv. 92-98).
I have heard Abo ʿAll al-Hasan, son of Abu Bakr al-Bannaʾ say: “The tomb of Joseph is a mound, also said to be the grave of al-Asbat [a tribe of Israel]. However, a man came from Khurasan who said it had been told him in a dream: ʿGo to Bayt al-Maqdis (Jerusalem) and tell them there it is, is the tomb ofJoseph
٩33S Xotp tpiqMJO B س3 BltulBMUqdo JOJ•
d 3AJ3S3td ajdoad PJO jnojo auuos uvqu ptuy III٧S I؛SUB3UU Aq pooM UEqujo S333 uo 3UUE3 اا31 B JO pOOM ٩؛3لا p OABIJ OJ ptunoj SEM ،U3A3A\Ol{ ‘poiqw؛S؛p3٧Bj33٧U•؛) sy luiq M٧IA\ UU3M I puv ‘33E(d ااأ3 p panupuoo suaquoM؛aa؛I(En٧u3A3 Xotp 3u^ ااأ3 snoauqS^j ؛،، ٧U033H؛p3nu: „داأ3 JOJ 3AE3JOJuaquEj^uupauapuo JOIUOAOS ااأ3
ه1دد3لا SLNOODDV HDIH^ NO SaDVTd JO لا3ه0لالم
St
Ahridgewentf the Use ofJurists
p. 47
This chapter is assigned especially to the use of those who wish to learn the metropoles of the Muslims, and the districts of the regions, and to be acquainted with the number of the capitals and their towns, but who have not the leisure to study what we have written in detail, and do not need a copy of our entire treatise; at the same time requiring a summary that is easy to carry in traveling, and to retain, because of its brevity. How many times I have been asked for this extract, this chapter desired of me! I have accordingly introduced it here before entering on an account of the realm of Islilm; I have used conciseness of expression, avoiding prolixity and obscure language. He who can will understand it; and otherwise the information is in the text.
You understand that we represent the metropoles as kings, the capitals as chamberlains, the towns as armies, the villages as foot soldiers. There is a difference of opinion about the meaning of metropolis: the jurisprudents define “metropole" as any town with a large population, in which legal punishments are administered, having a resident governor, its revenue sufficient for its expenses, and administratively associated with its rural district, for example: ʿAthr, Nilbulus, Zozan. The linguists define as a metropole every city that lies close to the boundary between two countries, such as al-Basra, al-Raqqa, Arrajiln. In popular speech metropole means any large and important town such as al-Rayy, al-Mawsil, and al-Ramla. For our part we use the term metropole in the sense of any town which is the seat of the highest authority, where the governmental bureaux are assembled, to which is assigned the functions of administration, and which, for the towns of the entire region constitutes a central place, for example: Dimashq, al-Qayrawiln, and ShIrilZ.
A metropole or a capital may have districts, which have, themselves, towns, for example Tukhilristiln in relation to Balkh; al-Batilʾih (the Swamps) ofWilsit; and al-Zilb of IfrIqiya.
The regions are fourteen in number. Six ofthem are Arabian: the Peninsula of the Arabs, al-ʿIrāq, AqOr, al-Shilm, Misr, and al-Maghrib. Eight are non-Arabian: al-Mashriq, al-Daylam, al-Rihab, al-Jibill, Khozistiln, Filrs, Kirmiln, and al-Sind.
Every region must have districts, every district a capital, every capital a number of towns: exceptions occur in the Peninsula of the Arabs, al-Mashriq, and al-Maghrib, for every one of these has two metropoles. The metropole is the capital of its district, but every capital is not necessarily a metropole. The names of the metropoles are also the names of their districts, except for the first four, al-Mansora, and the last three.
We shall begin our list from al-Mashriq, and carry on through to al-Maghrib.
The metropoles are,—Samarqand, Iranshahr, Shahrastiln, ArdabIl, Hamadhiln, al-AhwilZ, ShIrilZ, al-Sirjiln, al-MansOra, ZabId, Makka, Baghdild, p. 48 al-Mawsil, Dimashq, al-Fustat, al-Qayrawiln and Qurtuba The remaining capitals
47
ABRIDGEMENT FOR THE USE OF JURISTS
of districts are seventy-seven:-Bunjikath, Numajkath, Balkh, GhaznIn, Bust, Zaranj, Harat, Qayin, Marw, al-Yahadiyya, al-Damghan, Amul, Barwan, Itil, Maragha, DabIl, al-Rayy, al-YahOdiyya, al-Sūs, Jundaysabūr, Tustar, al-ʿAskar, al-Dawraq, Ramhurmuz, Arrajan, SIraf, Darabjird, Shahrastan, Istakhr, ArdfshIr, NarmasIr, Bamm, jIruft, Bannajbar, Quzdar, Wayhind, Qannawj, al-Multan, San<aʾ, al-Basra, al-Kofa, Wasit, Hulwan, Samarra, Amid, al-Raqqa, Halab, Hims, Tabariyya, al-Ramla, Sughar, al-Farama, Bilbays, al-ʿAbbasiyya, Iskandariyya, Uswan, Barqa, Balarm, Tahart, Fas, Sijilmasa and Tarfana.
We shall now mention the towns that surround their capitals, naming first the chamberlain [capital] and following up with its troops [towns]. Anyone having difficulty in understanding anything here may research it in its proper region.
AkhsIkat,—Nasrabadh, Ranjad, Zarakan, Khayralam, Washabshan, (Bisha-bishan), UshtIqlln, Zarandaramish, Ozkand, Osh, Quba, Birink, MarghInan, Rishtan, Bab, Jarak, Usht, Tabakar, Uwal, Dakarkard, Nawqad, Muskan, BIkan, AshkhIkhan (?), Jidghil, Shawadan, Khujanda. IsbIjab has: Khawralagh, Jamshalagha, UsbanIkat, Barab, Shllwaghar, Sawran, Turar Zarakh, Shaghlajan, Balaj, Barakat, Barakh, Yakankath, Adhakhkath, Dih-NajIkat, Taraz, Baluwa, Jikil, Barskhan, Utlukh, Jamakat, Shilji, Kal, Sas, Takabkath, Balasakun, Laban, Shay, Abaligh, Madankath, Barsiyan, Balgh, Jikarkan, Yagh, Yakaligh, Rawanjam, Katik, Shar Jashmah, Dil Awas, Jarkard. Binkath has: Nukkath, p. 49 jInanjakath, Najakath, Binakath, Kharashkath, Gharjand, Ghannaj, JamOzan (Jabazan), Warduk, Kabarna, Namadwanak, Najkath, Ghazak, Anadhkath, Bishkat, Barkash, Khatankath, JIghakath, Farankad, Kadak, Nakalak, Tall Awsh, Ghuzkard, Zarankath, Darwa, Faradkath, Ajakh. Among its districts are: Ilaq, the capital of which is Tankath, with the towns of Shawakath, Banjkhash, Nakath, Balaylln, Arbilakh, Namadhlagh, Khumrak, Sikath, KuhsIm, Adakhkath, Khas, Khujakath, Gharjand, SamsIrak, Biskath. Bunjikath has: Arsubanlkath, Kurdakath, Ghazaq, Silbilt, ZllmIn, Dlzak, Najkath, Qatawiln-Dizah Kharaqllna, Khisht, Marsmanda. Numajkath has: Baykand, al-Tawawis, Zandana, Bamijkath, KhudImankan, ʿUrwiln, Bakhsan, SIkath, AryamIthan, Warakhsha, ZarmIthan, Kamajkath, FagharsIn, Kashafghan, NawIdak, Warkil. Its district ofKish includes the towns of Nawqad-Quraysh, Sanaj, and Iskifghan. Nasaf, also a district, has the towns Kasba, Bazda, and SIrakath. Samarqand has Bunjikath, Waraghsar, Abghar, Kushaniya, Ishtlkhan, Dabasiya, KarmIniya, Rabinjan, Qatawana.
On the Jayhan are:-،ht district of Khuttal; its chief city is Hulbuk, and the towns are Marand, Andljarilgh, Halaward, Lawakand, Karbank, Tamliyilt, Iskandara, Munk, Farghar, and Bank: also the towns Tirmidh, Kalif, Zamm, NawIdah, Amul, and Firabr. The district ofal-Saghllniyan has the towns DarzanjI, Basand, Sankardah, Baham, ZInwar, Rikdasht, al-Shflmān, Quwildiyan, Andiyiln, Dastajird (Washjird), and Hanban. The capital ofKhwarazm on the Haytal side is Kath, and its towns are Ghardaman, Wayikhm, ArdhakhIwa, Nawkafagh, Kardar, Mazdakhqin, JashIra, Sadar, Zardokh, Qaryat-Baratakm and Madkamlniyya.
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
48
The capital of Khwarazm on the side of Khurasan is al-Jurjaniyya, and the towns are Nuzwar, Zamakhshar, Rozawand, Wazarmand (Awzarmand), Daskakhan-Khas, Khushmithan, MadKamīrhan, Khiwa, Kardarankhas, Hazar-asf (Hazarasp), Jiqarwand, Sadfar, Jurjaniyya, Jaz, Darghan and Jit.
Balkh has Ushforqan, Salim, Karko, Jah, Madhr, Barwaz. The district of Tukharistan has the towns Walwalij, al-Taliqan, Khulm, Gharbank, Siminjan, Iskalkand, Rob, Baghlan al-ʿUlya (the upper) Baghlan al-Sufla (the lower), Askimasht, Rllwan, Arhan, Andarab and Sara-ʿAsim. The district of al-Bamiyan has towns: Basghorfand, Saq:twand, Lakhrab, Badhakhshan, Banjahir, Jarbayah, Barwan. Ghaznin has Kardiz, Sakawand, Nawah, Bardan, Damrakhi, Hashsh-Barah, Farmul, Sarhon, Lajra, Khuwasht-Ghurab, Zawah, Kawil, Kabul, Lamghan, Bndan, Lahokar. It has the district ofWalishtan; its towns are Afshin, Asbidajah, Mastank, Shal, Sakira, Siwah. Bust hasJalaqan, Ban, Qarma, Bnzad, Dawar, Sarwistan, Qaryat al-Jawz, Rakhnd, Bakrawadh, Banjaway, Talaqan. Zaranj has Kuwayn, Zanbnk, Farah, Darhind, Qarnin, Kawarabwadh. Baranwadh, Kizah, Sinj, Bab al-Ta<am, Karwadikan, Nih, al-Taq. Harat has Karnkh, Awbah, Malin al-Safalqat, Khaysar, Astarabyan, Marabadh. Its districts are: Boshanj, which has the towns Kharkard, Faljard, Kosny and Karah; Badhghis, with towns Dihistan, Koghanabadh, Knfa, Busht, Jadhawa, Kabrnn, Kalwnn, and Jabal al-Fidhdha; Kanj Rustaq, has the towns Baban, Kif and Bagh; Asfuzar has the towns Kuwashan, Kuwaran, Koshk and Adraskar. Of the district of Gharjistan the capital is Abshin; it has the towns Shnrmin, Balikan and Astabon (?). Al-Yahodiyya has Anbar, Barzur, Faryab, Kalan, al-Jurzuwan. Marw has Kharaq, Hurmuzfarrah, Bashan, Sanjan, Sawsqan, Sahba, Kirank, Sink- ʿAbbildi, Dandanaqiln. Its district is Marw al-Rodh, having the towns Qasr Ahnaf and Talaqan, also the town of Sarakhs. Qayin has Tun, Khwast, Khor, Kuri, Tabas (al-ʿUnnab), al-Raqqa, Yunabidh, Sanawadh, Tabas as-Sufla, (the lower). Iranshahr has Bnzjan, Znzan, Turthith, Sabzawar, Khusrujird, Azadhwar, Khnjan, RIwand, Mazul, Malin, Jajarm. Its entrepots are: ĪŪS) with its capital al-Tabaran, and towns al-Nūqan, al-Rildakan, Junabid, Ustnrqan, Turnghbadh; Nasū has towns Isflnaqan, al-Sarmaqan, Afrawa, Shahristanah; and Abiward has towns Mahana, Kufan.
Al-Damghan has Bistam, Mughun, Simniln, Zaghna, Biyar. Shahristan has Abasknn, Alham, Astarabadh, Akhur, al-Ribat, Amul, Salns, Sariya, Mila, MilmatIr, Turunja (Barji), Tamis, HarI, Bud, MamtIr, Nwiya, TamIsa. Barwan has Walamir, Shakiraz, Tarum, Khashm. Its district, al-Jlll and its towns, Dnlab, Baylaman, Shahr, Kuhan-Rndh. Itil has Bulghar, Samandar, Suwar, Baghand, Qayshawa, al-Baydhaʾ, Khamlij, Balanjar.
Bardha<a has TiflIs, al-Qal<a Khunan, Shamknr, Janza, BardIj, al-Shamakhiya, Shirwan, Baknh, al-Shabariln, Bab al-Abwab, al-Abkhaz, Qabala, Shakki, Malazkird, Tabla. DabIl has BidlIs, Khilat, Arjish, Barkari, Khny, Salamas, Urmiya, Dakharraqan, Maragha, Ahr, Marand, Sanjan, Qaliqala. Ardabil has Rfsba, TabrIz,Jabirwan, al-Miyanij, al-Sarat, Warthan, Mnqan, Mimadh, Baarzannd.
p. 50
p. 51
49
ABRIDGEMENT FOR THE USE OF JURISTS
Al-Rayy has Qumm, A wah, Sawa, Awa, Qazwin, Abhar, Zanjan, Shalanba, Wayma. Hamadhan has Asadawadh, Tazar, QarmasIn, Bustah, Raman, Wabah, Sirawand. It has a number of great districts, without towns, such as, Nihawand, with the town of Rudhrawar; Karaj-Abi- Dulaf, with another Kgraj; Marj; Barujird; al-Saymara, without towns; al-Dinawar, without towns; and Shahrazur [lacuna in MS]. Al-Yahodiyya has al-Madlna, Khalanjan, al-Ribat, Lurdakan, Sumayram, Yfzd, Nayin, Niyastanah, Ardistan, Qashan.
Al-Sūs has al-Bidhan, Bfsinna, Bayrut, Qaryat al-Raml, Karkha. Jun-daysabur has al-Diz, al-Rnnash, Bayuh, QadhibIn, al-Lur. In Tustar I have seen no town p. 52 whatever. Al-ʿAskar has Jubak, Zaydan, Suq al-Thalathaʾ (Tuesday market), Hubk-dhu Qurtum. Al-Ahwaz has Nahr TIra, Jnzdak, Blroh, Snq al-Arbacaʾ (Wednesday market), Hisn MahdI, Basiyan, Shurab, Bandam, Dawraq, Khan Tawq, Sana, Manadhir al-Sughra. Al-Dawraq has Azam (Ajam), Bakhsabadh, al-Diz, Andabar, Azar, Jubba, Miraqiyan, Mirathiyan. Ramhurmuz has Sanbil, Idhaj, Tiram, Bazank, Ladh, Gharwa, Bafaj, Kuzuk.
Arrajan has Qustan, Daryan, Mahruban, Jannaba, SinIz, Balasabur, Hinduwan. SIrafhas Jnr, Maymand, Naband, al-Simakan, Khabr, Khawaristan, al-Ghundijan, Kuran, Samiran, Zirabadh, NajIram, Naband-Dnn (the lower), Sura, Raʾs Kishm. Darabjird has Tabastan, al-Kurdiban, Kurram, Yaz-dikhwast, Rustaq al-Rustaq, Burk, Azbarah, Sinan, Juwaym-Abi-Ahmad, al-Isbahanat. ShIraz has al-Baydhaʾ, Fasa, al-Mass, Kul, Jur, KarazIn, Dasht-Barin, Jamm, Jnbak, Jamkan, Knrd, Bajjah, Hazar, (Azar Sabor), Abak. Shahrastan has DarIz, Kazarnn, Khurrah, al-Nawbandijan, Kariyan, Kunduran, Tawwaz, Ramm (Zamm) al-Akrad, Junbad, Khasht. Istakhr has Harat, Maybudh, MaʾIn, al-Fahraj, al-Hira, Sarwistan, Usbanjan, Bawwan, Shahr-Batiq, Ord, al-Run, Dih Ushturan, Khurrama, Tarkanishan, Sahah (Sahak).
BardasIr has Mahan, Kiighon, Zarand, Janzarudh, Kuh-Binan, Qawaf, Zawar, Unas, Khunawab, Ghubayra, Karishtan. Its district is Khabis; its towns, Nashk, Kashid, Kuk, Kathrawa. Some of the isolated towns are Janzarndh, Firzin, Najat, KhIr, Marzuqan, al-Snraqan, Maghiin, Jayroqan. Al-SJrjan has Bimand, al-Shamat, Wajib, Baznrak, Khur, Dasht-Barln, KashIstan. NarmasIr has Bahar, Karak, RIkan, Nasa, Darjin. Bamm has Darzhin, Toshtan, Awarak, Mihrikird, Rayin, MaʾIn, RaʾIn. Jiruft has Bas, Jakin, Mannqan, Darahqan, Juwi-Sulayman, Knh-Barjan, Quhistan, Maghnn, Jawa-wan, Walashjird, Rndhkan, DarfanI.
Bannajbur has Mashka, Kij, Sarl-Shahr, Barbnr, Khwash, Damandan, Jalak, Dazak, Dasht-ʿAli, al-Tlz, Kabartiin, Rasak, Bih, Band, Qasr-Qand, Asfiqa, Fahal-Fahrah, Qanbala, ArmaʾJl. Wayhind has Qamuhul, Kanbaya, Sobara [lacuna p. 53 in MS], Oriha, Zahu, Har, Barhirawa. Quzdar has QandabIl, Bajathrad, Jathrad (Kathrad), Bakanan, Khuzi, Rustakuhan, Murdan, Rudh, Masakan, Kaharkur, Mahali, Kizkanan, Sura (Shura), Quzdar. Al-Mansura has Daybul, Zandarij, Kadar, Mayil, Tanbali, BirOn, Qallari, Annari, Ballari, al-Maswahi, al-Bahraj, Baniya, ManhatarI (Manjabari), al-Rnr (Arnr), Snbara, Kinas, Saymnr.
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
50
Zabid has Maʿqir, Kadra, Mahjam, Mawr, ʿAtana, al-Sharja, Ghalilfiqa, Mukhil, al-Hirda, al-Jurayb, al-Lasʿa١ Sharma, al-ʿAshlra, Ranqa, al-Khasūf, as-Saʿid, al-Jarada, al-Hamidha. The district ofʿAthr has towns, Baysh, al-Jurayb, Haly, as-Sirrayn. San^ʾ has Saʿda, Najran, Jurash, al-ʿUrf, Jublan, al-Janad, Dhamilr, Nasafiln, Yahsib, fs-Suhul, al-Mudhaykhira, Khawlan. Makka has Mini!, Amaj, al-Juhfa, al-Furʿ١ Jabala, Mahayiʿ, Hadha, al-Taʾʾf, Balda. The district of Yathrib has towns, Badr, al-Jar, Yanbuʿ, al-ʿUshayra, al-Hawrilʾ, al-Marwa, Suqya-Yazld, Khaybar. The district of Qurh: its capital is Wadi 'l-Qura; its towns, al-Hijr, al-ʿAwnld, Badi\ Yaʿqob, Dhabba, an-Nabk. Suhar has Nazwa, al-Sirr, Dhank, HafIt, Daba, Salnt, Jullafar, Samad, Lasya, Milah. The district ofMahra: its towns are al-Shihr [lacuna in MS]. The district of al-Ahqaf; chief town, Hadhramawt. The district of Saba; the district of al-Yamama. Al-Ahsiiʾ has al-Zarqaʾ, Sabun, Uwill, al-ʿ٧qayr.
Al-Basra has al-Ubulla, Nahr al-Dayr, Matara, Madhar, Nahr Zaban, Badran, Bayan, Nahr al-Amlr, Nahr al-Qadlm, ʿAbbadan, Abu al-Khasib, Nahr-Dubba, al-Muttawwiʿa, al-Qndal, al-Maftah, al-Jaʿfariyya. Al-Kofa has Hammilm ʿUmar, al-Jamiʿayn, Soril, al-Nli, al-Qadisiyya, ʿAyn al-Tamr. Baghdad has Baradan, al-Nahrawan, Kara, al-Daskara, Tarāstan, Haroniyya, Jalula, Bajisril, Bi\quba, Buwahriz, Kalwadha, Darzijan, al-Madaʾin, Asbanbur, Gil, Sib, Dayr al-ʿAqūl, al-Nuʿmilniyya, Jabbul, (Abartil, Biibil, Qasr Hubayra, ʿAbdas, Nahrawa. Wi\sit has Fam al-Silh, Nahr Sabus, Darmakan, Badhibin, Quraquba, Siyada, al-Sikr, Qurqnb, al-Tib, Lahban, al-Basamiya, Odisa. The district of al-Bataʾih has capital, al-Sallq, and towns,Jamida, Huru, al-Haddadiyya, p. 54 al-Zubaydiyya. Hulwan has Khilniqin, Zabnjan, al-Marj, Shala-shilan, al-Jamid, al-Hurr, al-Sirawiln, Bandanijan. Samarra has al-Karkh, ClJkbara, al-Dor, al-Jamiʿayn, Batt, Radhilnilt, Qasr al-Jass, Hari, Aywana, Bariqa, Sindiyya, Raqafroba, Dimimma, al-Anbar, Hit, Takrlt, al-Sinn.
Al-Mawsil has Nnnawa, al-Haditha, Maʿathaya, al-Hasaniyya, Tall Aʿfar, Sinjilr, al-Jibal, Balad, Adhrama, Barqaʿld, Nasibin, Dara, Kafartotha, Raʾs al-ʿAyn١ Thamanin. Amid has Mayyafariqln, Tall Fafiln, Hisn Kayfa, al-Filr, Hadhiya. Al-Raqqa has al-Muhtariqa, al-Rafiqa, Khanoqa, al-Harlsh, Tall Mahra, Bajarwan, Hisn Maslama, Tarʿnz, Harran, al-Ruha. Some of the districts: JazIrat-Ibn-ClJmar; towns: Fayshabnr, Baʿaynatha, al-Mughltha, al-Zawazan. The district of Saroj has towns, Kafarzab, KafarsIrIn. The district of al-Furat: chief city, QarqIsiya; towns, al-Rahba, al-Daliya, ʿAna, al-Hadltha. The district of al-Khabor: chief city, ʿAraban; towns, al-Husayn, al-Shamslniyya, MaykasIn, Sukayr al-ʿAbbas, al-Khaysha, al-SakIniyya, al-Tunanlr.
Halab has Antakiya, Balis, Sumaysat, al-Maʿarratayn, Manbij, Bayyas, al-Tinat, Qnnasrin, al-Suwaydiyya. Hims has Salamiyya, Tadmur, al-Khunasira, Kafartab, al-Ladhiqiyya, Jabala, Jubayl, Antarsos (Antartos), Bulunyas, Hisn al-KhawabI, Lajjon, Rafaniyya,Josiya, Hamat, Shayzar, Wadi Butnan. Dimashq has Darayya, Baniyi\s, Sayda, Bayrnt, ʿArqa, Atrabulus, al-ZabadanI. The district of al-Biqaʿ: chief city, Baʿabakk: towns, Kamid, ʿArjamosh. Tabariyya has
51
ABRIDGEMENT FOR THE USE OF JURISTS
Baysan, Adhriʿjlt, Qadas, Kabul, al-tgijun, ʿAkka, Sur, al-Faradhiya. Al-Ramla has Bayt al-Maqdis, Bayt-Jibrll, Ghazza, ʿAsqallln, Yafa, Arsof, Qaysariyya, Nabulus, ArIha, ʿAmmlln. Sughar has Wayla, ʿAynuna, Madyan, Tabuk, Adhruh, Maʾab, Muʿj\n.
Al-Farama has al-Baqqllra, al-Warrada, al-ʿArlsh, TinnIs, Dimyat, Shatll, Dabqu. Al-ʿAbbasiyya has ShubrO-wllZah, Damanhor, Sanhor, Banha al-ʿAsal, p. 55 Shatnuf, MalIj, DamIra, Bora, Daqahla, Sanhur, Baris (?), Sandala, and seven other towns each named Mahalla. Bilbays has Mashtol, Faqus, JurjIr, Sandafa, Banha alʿAsal, DamIra, Tukh, and Tantathana also known as Dayr Natlly. Al-Iskandariyya has al-Rashld, Mahallat-Hafs, Dhat al-Humam, Burullus. Al-Fustat has al-Jazlra, al-Jlza, al-Qahira, al-ʿAzlziyya, ʿAyn Shams, Bahna, al-Mahalla, Sandafa, Damanhor, Hulwlln, al-Qaulzum. Uswlln has Qus, AkhmIm, Bulyana, Taha., Sumusta, BOsIr, Ushmunayn, Ajmaʿ. Also the district of al-Fayyum.
Barqa has Ramada, Atrabulus, Ajdabiya, al-Sus, Sabra, Qabis, Ghafiq. Balarm has al-Khalisa, Atrabunush, MllZar, ʿAyn al-Mughatta, Qalʿat al-Ballūt, Jirjant, ButhIra, Saraqosa, LantInI, Qataniya, Alyaj, Fatarnuwa (Batarnuwa), TabarmIn, MIqush, MassIna, Rimta, Damannash, Jaras, Qalʿat al-Qawarib, Qalʿat al-Sirat, Qalʿat AbI-Thawr, Batarliya, Thirma, Borqad, Qaurliyun, QarInash, BartinIq, Akhyas, Balja, Bartanna. Al-Qayrawan has Sabra, Asfaqus, al-Mahdiyya, Sosa, Tunis, Banzart, Tabarqa, Marsa al-Kharaz, Bona, Baja, p. 56 Lurbus, Qarna, MarnIsa, Mas, Banjad, Marmajanna, SabIba, Qamuda, Qafsa, Qastiliya, Nafzawa, Lafis, Awdha, Qalanus, Qabisha, Rusfa, Banunush, Lajam, JazIrat AbI SharIk, Baghay, Soq-Ibn-Khalaf, Dofana, al-MasIla, AshIr, Soq Hamza, JazIrat Bani-Zaghannaya, MattIja, Tanas, Dar, Soq Ibrahim, al-Ghuzza, Qalʿat Burjuma, Baghir, Yalal, Jabal Tujan, Wahran, Jurawa, Arzkul, MalIla, Nakur, Sabta, Kalzawa, Jabal Zalagh, Asfaqus, MunastIr, Marsa al-HajjamIn, Banzart, Tabarqa, Hayyaja, Lurbus, Marsa al-Hajar, Jamunas al-Sabnn, Taras, QastIliya, Nafta, Taqiyos known as MadInat al-Qausur, Miskiyana, Baghay, Dufana, ʿAyn al-ʿAsafir, Dar Maluwwal, Tubna, Maqqara, Tijis, MadInat al-MahriyyIn, Tamasnat, Dakkama, Qasr al-IfrIqI, Rakwa, al-QaustantIniyya, Mila, Jijil, TabarrIt, Satlf, Ikija, Marsa al-Dajaj, AshIr. Tahart has Yammama, TaghalIsiya, Qalʿat Ibn al-Harab, Hazara, al-Jaʿba١ GhadIr al-Duroʿ, Lamaya, Mindas, Suq Ibn Habla, Matmata, Jabal Tujlln, Wahran, Shalif, TIr, al-Ghuzza, Soq Ibrahim, Rahbaya, al-Batha, al-Zaytuna, Tamamma, Yaʿod, al-Khadhraʾ, WllrIfan, Tanas, Qasr al- Fulos, Bahriyya, Soq Kara, Manjasa, OzikI, TabrIn, Suq Ibn Mablul, Ruba, TawIlt Abl-Maghul TamazzIt, another TawIlt (Laghwa), Fakklln.
Sijilmasa has Darʿa, Tadanqost, Athar, Ayla, WilmIs, Hisn Ibn Salih, p. 57 al-NahhasIn, Hisn al-Sodan, Hilal, Imsala, Dar al-AmIr, Hisn Barara, al-Khiyamat, TllZrnt. Fas has al-Basra, Zalul, al-Jahid, Soq al-KutamI, Wargha, Sabu, Sanhaja, Hawwllra, Tiza, Matmata, Kazannaya, Sala, MadInat Bani Qarbas, Mazhahiyya, AzIla, Sabta, Balad Ghumar, Qalʿat al-Nusur, Naknr, Balash,
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
52
MarnIsa, TabarIda, Saʿ, another town, Miknasa, Qalʿat ShamIt, Madaʾin, Burjan Uzikl, Tayonn, MaksIn, AmlIl, Amlah Abi al-Hasan, Qastlna, Nafzilwa, Niqilwus, Biskra, Qablsha. Its districts: Al-Zab: its capital, al-Maslla; towns, Maqqara, Tubna, Biskra, Badis, Tahndha, Tawlaqa, JamIla, Bantiyos, Adna, AshIr. Tanja: its towns, Wallla, Madraka, Matrnka, Zaffon, Ghuzza, GhumIra, al-Hiljir, Tajarajara, al-Baydhaʾ, al-Khadhraʾ. Tarfana has Aghmat Waylil [=Aylan], [Aghmat] WarIka, Tandall, Milssa, Zaffon, Ghuzza, GhumIra, al-Hiljir, Qayton, al-Khadhrilʾ. Among the noted towns of Qurtuba are: Tulaytula, Lilrida, Tutlla, Saraqusta (Saraqnsa), Turtnsha, Balansiya, Mursiya, Bajjilna, Malaqa, Istija, Rayya, Jayyiln, Shantara, Ghilfiq, Turjilla, Quriya, Milrida, Bilja, ShantarIn, Ukhshunuba, Ishblliya, Sadnna (Shadhona), Jabal Tariq, Qarmuna, Mawrur, al-JazIra.
Had I entered al-Andalus I should have divided it into districts, considering the great number of towns, provinces, and districts there; for al-Andalus is comparable with Haytal, but is more important. Indeed there remain other cities of Islilm we did not mention through our lack of acquaintance with them. Al-Andalus resembles the African side of this province, or nearly so.
Ibn Khurradildhbih mentions that there are forty cities there, and these are those listed above.
An Account ofthe Cliwates ofthe World and the Position ofthe ^hla
p. ss You should know that everyone who has written on this subject has fixed the number of climates at fourteen-seven distinctly manifest and habitable and seven uninhabitable. I have heard one astronomer say that all created beings live in the west, and that no one lives in the east, because ofthe heat; but I have heard another say because of the cold. It has been estimated that from the remotest part of al-Maghrib to these habitable lands at the limits of the territory of the Turks, is [two thousand] six hundredfarsakhs, as the crow flies. It is on this basis that the authors we have mentioned have written their works on this subject; and from them, and from the eminent astronomers we have met, we have derived the material for this section. Certainly this knowledge is required in determining the direction of the Qibla, and the situation of the climates relative thereto. For my part, I myself have encountered people who have changed the Qibla, and differed on its direction. Had they known the basic principles herein they would not have been at variance about its position, nor would they have changed what the ancient authorities established. [Map III]
The earth resembles a sphere somewhat. It is situated within the celestial sphere, as the yolk is within the egg. The air surrounds the earth, and attracts it from every point on earth in the direction of the celestial sphere. The equilibrium of the condition of creatures on the earth is because the atmosphere attracts the lightness that is in them, and the earth the heaviness that is in them, for the earth is comparable to the stone that attracts iron. Some have made a comparison between the celestial sphere and a turner's rotating a hollowed out object having a walnut inside it: when he turns the hollow object the walnut stays in the middle.
The earth is divided into two equal parts defined by the equator, which extends from east to west, and represents the longitude of the earth; it is the longest line on the terrestrial sphere, just as the zone of the zodiac represents the greatest length in the celestial sphere. The latitude of the earth is from the south pole, round which Suhayl (Canopus) turns, to the north pole, round which turn Banat Naʿsh (Ursa Major and Ursa Minor). The circumference of the earth at the equator is three hundred sixty degrees; as a degree is twenty-five farsakhs, the circumference is nine thousand farsakhs. From the equator to each of the poles is ninety degrees. The circumference of the earth latitudinally is the same as at the equator. However, the inhabited portion of the earth, beyond the equator is twenty four degrees, the rest being submerged beneath the sea. Humankind inhabits the northern quarter of the earth, the southern quarter being uninhabitable; the hemisphere that is beneath us has no inhabitants. The two quarters of which we have knowledge constitute the fourteen regions mentioned above.
ssn3J٥؟S3٩jni١n^ J3qos؟JO ‘uqwg ‘zi؟iu3؟3i٩؟٠Sun١ قل0لاا09 ipjBAqqv—s laSuaids .SIVع7ا ٩^ ٩؟0 uoissiuuad puولاأوJS؟؟٩sj؟i٩؟٩3qjo ٠th٠N-IV :III dcjv (٥3S ٠٥ Ok،).
55
AN ACCOUNT OF THE CLIMATES OF THE WORLD
The First Climate is thirty-eight thousand five hundred farsakhs in length, and in latitude is one thousand nine hundred ninety-five farsakhs. [In this Account ofthe Climates ..., derived from others, al-MuqaddasI, as right here, is many times inconsistent and extravagant in his figures]. It begins where, when the day is equal to the night, the shadow at noon is a foot and a half plus a tenth and a sixth of a tenth of a foot; it ends where, at this same time, it is two and three fifths feet. The distance of latitude between the two extremities is about three hundred ninety miles, a mile being the equivalent of four thousand cubits. Its middle lies close to the position of San<aʾ, ʿAdan, and al-Ahqaf; the extremity which is close to Syria lies in Tihama, near Makka. Among the primary settlements it contains are San<aʾ, ʿAdan, Hadhramawt, Najran, Jurash, Jayshan, Saʿda, Tabala, ʿUman, al-Bahrayn, the furthermost portions of the country of the Sudan [Blacks], on to al-Maghrib, some portions of al-Hind (India) and China that adjoin the seashore. All places that have the same latitude as these, both to the east and to the west, are likewise within this climate.
The Second Climate begins where, when the day and night are equal, the shadow at noon, as already said, is two and three fifths feet. The distance between the two extremities is three hundred fifty miles, in a straight line. The middle of it lies about Yathrib, the southernmost portion beyond Makka; the other extremity towards the north is close to al-Thaʿlabiyya, Makka and al-Thaʿlabiyya being between two climates. Some towns in this climate are: Makka, Yathrib, al-Rabadha, Fayd, al-Thaʿʿabiyya, Uswan of Misr, thence to the border ofNubia, also al-Mansora, al-Yamama, and portions of the territories of al-Sind and al-Hind. All places in the latitude of these, to the east and to the west, are in this climate.
The Third Climate begins where the shadow, at midday, is three feet plus half a foot, plus one tenth and one sixth of a tenth of a foot. It ends where the shadow at the equinox at midday is four feet and a half of a foot, plus a third of a tenth of a foot. The day attains, in the middle of this climate, a length of fourteen hours, its middle lying near Madyan Shuʾayb on the Syrian side, and near Waqisa on the side of al-ʿIrāq. The breadth of this zone is about three hundred miles and a half [“and a half’ should probably read “and upwards" by a plausible amendment of the Arabic text], as the crow flies. Al-Thaʿʿabiyya, and every place on that latitude, to the east and to the west, are on the furthermost extremity of this climate to the south; Baghdad, Fars, Qandahar of al-Hind, al-Urdunn, Bayrnt are on the extremity closest to Syria; and similarly for all places on the same latitude, to the east and to the west. Waqisa, and every place on its parallel, to the east and to the west are thus between two climates. Of the towns within this climate are: al-Knfa, al-Basra, Wasit, Misr, al-Iskandariyya, al-Ramla, al-Urdunn, Dimashq, ʿAsqalan, the Holy Land, Qandahar of al-Hind, the coasts of Kirman, Sijistan, al-Qayrawan, Kaskar, and al-Madaʾin. Similarly, all places on the same parallel as these, to the east and to the west, are within this climate.
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
56
The Fourth Climate has its beginning where the shadow, at the time we have specified, is four feet and three fifths, and a third of a fifth of a foot. Its breadth is somewhat upwards of two hundred sixty miles as the crow flies. Its middle part lies close to Aqor, Manbij, ʿArqa, Salamiyya and Qumis, on the side towards al-Rayy. Its lower extremity, which is towards al-ʿIrāq, is close to Baghdad, and the places on that parallel, to the east and to the west. Its upper extremity is towards al-Sham, close to QalIqala and the shores of Tabaristan, on to ArdabIl, Jurjan, and all places on this parallel. Of the notable towns in this climate are: NasIbIn, Dara, al-Raqqa, QnnasrIn, Halab, Harran, Sumaysat, the frontier towns of al-Sham, al-Mawsil, Samarra, Hulwan, ShahrazOr, Masabadhan, al-DInawar, p. 61 Nihawand, Hamadhan, Isbahan, al-Maragha, Zanjan, QazwIn, Tos, Balkh, and all places coming near these towns in latitude.
The Fifth Climate begins where the shadow is five feet, plus three fifths, and a sixth of a fifth of a foot: the distance, in width, between one extremity and the other, is about two hundred thirty miles as the crow flies. Its middlepoint is close to the area of TiflIs in al-Rihab, to Marw in Khurasan, and to the country of Jurjan, and all towns in this zone, to the east and to the west. Its upper extremity towards the north is close to DabIl. Within it some towns are: Qallqala, Tabaristan, Malatya, Rnmiyya, Daylaman, JIlan, ʿAmmOriyya, Sarakhs, Nasa, AbIward, Kish, al-Andalus, and places close to Romiyya, and Antaliya.
The Sixth Climate begins where the shadow is six feet plus six tenths and a sixth of a tenth of a foot; its shadow at the extremity differs from that at the beginning by just one foot. Its breadth is somewhat more than two hundred miles, as the crow flies. Its lower extremity towards the south coincides with the upper northern border of the adjacent fifth climate; and that is the latitude of DabIl, to the east and to the west. Its uppermost limit towards the north lies close to the land of Khwarazm and what is beyond it, and to Isbljab beside the territory of the Turks. Its middle part lies close to al-Qustantlniyya, Amul in Khurasan, Farghana, and places on this latitude, to the east and to the west. In it lie Samarqand, Bardhaʿa, Qabala, al-Khazar, al-Jll, the parts of al-Andalus which are towards the north, and the southernmost territories of the Saqaliba (Slavs).
The Seventh Climate has its beginning where the shadow there is seven feet plus a half plus a tenth plus a sixth of one tenth of a foot, as at the end of the sixth; in fact the end of the sixth is the beginning of the seventh. Its southernmost limit corresponds with the northernmost limit of the climate adjacent to it, which is the sixth. That is the latitude of Khwarazm and Turarband, to the east and to the west. Its furthermost extremity towards the north lies in the remotest parts of the land of the Saqaliba, and on the territories of the Turks, which adjoin Khwarazm on the north. Its middle portion lies in the country of al-Lan, without any well- known towns.
ʿAbd Allah the son of ʿAmr asserts: the earth extends for a journey of five hundred years, four hundred years desolate, and one hundred inhabited. Of
57
AN ACCOUNT OF THE CLIMATES OF THE WORLD
this, the territory ofthe Muslims constitutes one year. According to Abu al-Jald the extent of the earth is twenty-four thousand farsakhs, al-Sodan accounting for twelve thousand, (the land of) the Romaeans eight thousand, Fars, three thousand, and (the lands of) the Arabs one thousandfarsakhs.
THE EMPIRE OF AL-ISLAM
You should know that the empire of al-Islam-may God, most exalted, watch over it!-is not uniform so as to make it possible to describe it as a quadrangle, or as having length and breadth. It is, in fact, quite irregular, as anyone realizes who pays careful attention to the points of the rising and setting of the sun, who has traversed the countries, has become acquainted with its routes, and measured its regions in farsakhs. We shall do our best to give as close a description of it as is possible, and represent it to the minds of people of intelligence and understanding, should God-may He be exalted-so will.
The sun sets at the extremity of al-Maghrib, where one may see it descending into the Encircling Ocean; similarly, the people of al-Sham see it disappear into the Sea of the Romaeans [Mediterranean].
The region ofMisr (Egypt) begins at the Sea ofthe Romaeans, and extends its length to the country of the Nubians; it lies between the Sea of al-Qulzum (Red Sea) and the borders of al-Maghrib. Al-Maghrib extends from the borders of Misr to the Encircling Ocean, as a strip compressed between the Sea of the Romaeans on the north, and the countries of the Blacks to the south.
The region of al-Sham extends from the border of Misr northwards to P. 63 the country of the Romaeans, and lies between the Romaean Sea and the Desert of the Arabs. The desert, and part of al-Sham adjoin the Peninsula of the Arabs; while the Sea of China encloses the Peninsula from Misr to ʿAbbadan. The country of al-ʿIrāq borders on the desert and a part of the Peninsula. The northern limits of al-Iraq are bordered by the region of Aqor, which extends to the country of the Romaeans, while the Euphrates encircles it towards the west. Beyond the Euphrates lies the remaining portion of the desert, and an area of al-Sham. These are the regions of the Arabs.
Khuzistan and al-Jibal lie along the eastern frontiers of al-ʿIrāq; parts of al-Jibal and the region of al-Rihab are on the border of Aqur to the east. Fars, Kirman, and al-Sind lie beyond Khnzistan, aligned in a single row: the sea is to the south, the desert and Khurasan to the north. Al-Sind and Khurasan to the east adjoin the countries of the Infidels; while al-Rihab borders the country of the Romaeans to the west and north. The region of al-Daylam lies between al-Rihab, al-Jibal, the desert, and Khurasan.
This is, then, the empire of al-Islam: study it carefully. There are variations in direction and altitude for anyone who traverses it from east to west. You see that if you go from the Encircling Ocean to Misr you are on a direct course, which then, however, slants slightly towards al-Irilq؛ then the line goes circuitously in the non-Arab regions to Khurilsiln, tending towards the north. Do you not see that the sun rises to the right of Bukhara, from the direction ofIsbljab?
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
60
Following are the dimensions of the empire we have described.
From the Encircling Ocean to al-Qayrawan, 120 stages;
thence to the Nile, 60 stages;
thence to the Tigris, 50 stages;
thence to the Jayhon, 60 stages;
thence to Tonkath, 15 days journey;
thence to Taraz, 15 days journey.
If you turn towards Farghana, then from the Jayhon to Uzkand is 30 stages. p. 64 If you turn towards Kashghar, the distance is 40 stages.
By another course you may go from the coasts of al-Yaman to al-Basra, 50 days journey;
thence to Isfahan, 138farsakhs; thence to Naysabor, 30 stages; thence to the Jayhun, 20 stages; thence to Taraz, 30 stages.
All these distances are as the crow flies, the regions of Misr, al-Maghrib, and al-Sham being omitted.
In terms of breadth there is considerable variation, for while the region of al-Maghrib is of little width, and likewise Misr, yet if you follow on a parallel in this direction towards al-Sham, the empire increases in breadth, and continues to be enlarged beyond the Jayhun to the country of al-Sind, where its breadth is about a three months' journey.
Abo Zayd determines the width to extend from Malatya to the Peninsula, al-ʿIraq, Fars, and Kirman, to the territory of al-Mansora. He does not mention the stages, saying only that it is a journey of about four months less ten days. What we have said is clearer and more sound: from the easternmost confines at Kashghar to remotest Sos is a journey of about ten months.
In the year 232/847 an estimate was made by order of the khalif of the amount of revenue raised from land-taxes, legal alms taxes, but omitting patronage and imposts, for the entire realm. It amounted to two million, three hundred twenty thousand, two hundred sixty four and one half dinars. The land tax of the Romaeans one time was calculated by order of al-Muʿtasim, and it amounted to five hundred qintars [a qintar equalled six thousand dinars], and some more qintars, the equivalent of less than three million dinars. So he wrote to the king of the Romaeans: “The least ofthe territories ruled by the least of my subjects provides a revenue larger than your whole dominion." [The inconsistency of the figures given by al-Muqaddasl makes pointless the boast of al-Muʿtasim].
Addition/version MS. c.
Bear in mind that my book deals with matters only as I found them at the time
61
THE EMPIRE OF AL-ISLAM
of my being present; but circumstances change. Do you not know that on my visiting the city of Sarakhs in the year 374/984, I found the governor there a man of unsound mind, and their preacher grievous to the spirit? And indeed it may well bo that we have inadvertently omitted the mention or description of some towns, well-known though they may be, and which we in fact have visited; let not the people of such towns reproach us, since error and forgetting are part ofthe human condition. Again, let no person be distressed when we mention the shortcomings of his country, for such mention does not by any means add to its defamation; any more than mention of its merits adds to its commendation. Indeed, this is a science that is founded on integrity and accuracy, and the mention of both the good and the bad; and were I to have concealed the shortcomings of any town I should have concealed the faults of my own native town, because of its great distinction and holiness in the sight of God, may He bo exalted, and of His creatures! Again, it may happen that one looks into our book and supposes he finds contradictions therein: let him persevere in his consideration of it, and he will come to realize what we are getting at. After all, have not some people courted eternal damnation for themselves through their holding the opinion that the Book of God, that august and noble work of which it is written, “Mendacity comes not to it from before it, nor from behind it,” (Qurʾān, sora 41, v. 41) contradicts itself? How then with the words of a weak and worthless creature?
You should realize, too, that we do not concern ourselves with the honorific titles of those whose names we mention in our book, such as “illustrious”, “learned”, for these are of the style of letter-writing, not of literary composition. I have noticed that the writers who preceded me are of two sorts: one will inaugurate a series of lectures to be given over an extended period of time thus drawing to himself students from abroad, and those eager to be trained as disciples. In this way his name is spread abroad and known to all people. As soon as he fulfills his hope and his reputation grows, he writes a book, and his work meets with acceptance.
People of understanding are receptive to his wisdom,
And thus did Ka<bl and Karkhl proceed.
Some dedicate their books to an important ruler,
Or to an eminent leader,
So as to give distinction to their works;
And this is the course followed by Ibn Qatayba and (?);
This is the route I have taken, whither I went, and which I chose.
And so I carefully considered the kings, and the princes, the notable, and the ministers.
And I thought about the most worthy person to whom I should dedicate my book,
And publicly associate it with him;
So I had my riding camel kneel at his door,
One who has surpassed all praises,
Supplies needs, bestows favors:
A man of wise judgment and decisive resolve,
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
62
One whom you see at all times elevating the pure,
Honouring the pious, loving what is best;
The virtuous constantly crowding around his door;
Who does not tire from giving and praying
And from extoling God, may He bo exalted, in the state of His sovereignty.
One whose renown is great among men,
And whom ʿAmld al-Dawla selected and appointed minister;
Whom the King of the Orient privileged and aided;
Whose virtues are manifest, his opinions mature,
His magnanimity evident, his title distinguished,
His lineage lofty, his country honourable,
His character pure:
The learned Shaykh, the chieftain Abu al-Hasan ʿAll bin al-Hasan.
That God-may He be exalted in His glory-may grant length and approval to his life.
And make felicitous his life hereafter, with continuance of the blessings of his life here.
May he make inalienable what He has bestowed on him, and granted him,
And especially this, a science possessed alone of ministers and of those who love it;
Of those who write it and those who elevate it.
This we have already mentioned to you in the prefatory material of our book. However, I have made this compendium general, while the dedicated part is specific, and I have titled it The Book of Distances and Governments, and this because important and influential people have a predilection for what is written concisely and effectively.
The length of the empire, as we have shown, is two thousand six hundred farsakhs; one hundred farsakhs being the equivalent of one million two hundred thousand cubits, the farsakh thus equals twelve thousand cubits. The cubit is equal to twenty-four fingers, a finger equalling the breadth of six grains of barley put side by side. A mile is one third of afarsakhs; however, there is variation in the length of a barid (post stage): in the desert and in al-Iraq it is twelve miles, in al-Sham and Khurasan it is six. You see that in Khurasan, a station has been built every two farsakhs, with facilities for the officials of the post route: this latter distance, accordingly, is the measure we adopt [for the barid].
p. 65
p. 66
The Peninsula ofthe Arahs
p. 67
We have begun with the Peninsula of the Arabs because in it is situated the Sacred House of God, as also the City of the Prophet-blessing and peace be on him!-and from here the religion of Islilm was disseminated. Here, moreover, lived the rightly-guided KhalIfas [Abo Bakr, <Umar, TJthmil, and ʿAlI, immediately succeeding the Prophet], as well as the Ansar [Helpers of the Prophet at al-Madlna], and the Muhajirin [the Emigrants-thtse who joined the Prophet in his emigration from Makka to Yathrib]. The flags of the Muslims stood together there, the interests of religion strengthened. Moreover, here are the places of ritual and ceremony for the appointed time on the Pilgrimage. Also, as it is a country with a tithing system, so the doctors of the laws have recorded it in their registers; and teachers of the law need a thorough knowledge of it for their commentaries. From this country also the earth was stretched out (Quran, sora 79, v. 30), and from here Abrahamten him be peacefaddresaed the human race. Along with this, the Peninsula comprises within it important divisions, some large districts, some valuable acreages. As you see, it contains al-Hijilz in its entirety, as well as the whole of al-Yaman, the area of Sabil, al-Ahqilf (Quran, sora 46, v. 21), al-Yamilma, al-Ashhilr, Hajar, <Umiln, al-Tilʾif, Najriln, Hunayn, al-Mikhlilf, Hijr Sillih (Quran, sora 7, vv. 73-79), the lands ofʿ.Ad and Thamod, the Abandoned Well and the Lofty Palace (Quran, sora 22, v. 45); it is the site of Iram of the pillars (Quran, sura 89, v. 7), the place of the “Makers of the Pit" (Quran, sora 85, v. 4), the Prison of Shaddild, the Tomb ofHod, the domain of Kinda, the twin mountains of Tayyiʾ, Buyot al-FilrihIn [the dwellings of those who enjoyed their lives in the valley] (Quran, sura 26, vv. 146 & seqq.), the mountain of SInil, Madyan of Shuʿayb, <Uyon (the wells of] MOsil. It is the greatest of the regions in extent, the broadest in area, the most excellent in soil, the most exalted in sacredness. Its towns are the most famous: here is San<itʾ which surpasses all other cities, and ʿAdan to which the travelers flock. Here are the land divisions which are a glory to al-Islilm, and delightful Yaman and al-Hijilz.
Now, should someone say, “Why have you made al-Yaman, al-Mashriq, and al-Maghrib each to consist of two sides?" I should say to him that as for al-Yaman, the Prophet-God's peace and blessings be upon him-made it the rendezvous point for those going to the sacred places.
Addition/version MS. c.
If it were said that the words ofthe Prophet meant that the people of Najd, not the people of al-Yaman, should begin the Pilgrimage at Qarn, my reply is that there is no disagreement that the people of San'ilʾ are among those who begin the Pilgrimage at Qarn, and there is no doubt that San'it is of al-Yaman. The meaning is, therefore, that the people of al-Yaman should begin the Pilgrimage from Yalamlam, with the exception only of the people of Najd; this is just as if a man were to say to his servant: “Pay to the Ashraf[descendants of the family
p. 68
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
64
of the Prophet] one thousand each, and to the descendants ofʿAll two thousand each.” Analogies to this are to be found in the Book and in the Laws.
As for Khurllslln, Abo Zayd considered it two regions, and he was an authority in this science, especially concerning his own region; accordingly, it is no criticism of us if we have made it two sides [of one province]. Should someone say, “Then why do you differ from him, having acknowledged him as an authority, by making Khuraslln one region", I should reply “We have two answers to this. The first is that we would not wish to divide the domain of the House of Saman; and it is widely recognized in the realm of al-Islam that they are the rulers of Khurasan, but that the seat of their government is at Haytal". The second answer is that Abo ʿAbd Allah al-Jayhanl, also an authority in this science, has not separated Khurasan. What we have said, then, is in agreement with one or other of these two on one point, and disagrees on the other. Addition/version MS. c.
Moreover, Ibn Khurradadhbih and Ibn al-Faqlh were also authorities in this science, and no one of them made a division of the region ofal-Mashriq. I have, therefore, accepted the writing of al-Fil.risl that it consists of two sides, and the statements of the others we mentioned to mean that it is one region. Do you not see that it is just as when some related of the Prophet-God’s peace and blessings be upon him-that in lifting his hands in prayer he reached the height of his shoulders, others say he reached the height of the ears; so, our doctors of the laws sanction the raising of the hands so as to combine the essence of both situations as differently reported. Now should it bo said: “The methoci you have devised differs from the methods of all those whom you have mentioned”; I should reply “I have differed from them only in my setting forth clearly some topics in which they made erroneous statements.” And indeed, were their books satisfactory and all of their statements correct, and had there been a profit to the man in the street from their compilations, I should not have taken on myself the burden I did. However, I did not see them going beyond distances and kingdoms and maps, and somewhat of curiosities, and the science of the stars.
As for the region of al-Maghrib, we divided it on the pattern of the region of al-Mashriq, the similarity between the two residing in that each of them represents a boundary of the realm of al-Islam in its longitudinal extent, and the point of rising and setting of the luminary of the earth.
This is the form of the Peninsula of the Arabs. [Map IV]
We have divided this region into four extensive provinces, and four large
districts. The provinces are al-Hijaz, al-Yaman, CUman, Hajar; the districts
al-Ahqaf, al-Ashhar, al-Yamama, Qurh.
The capital of al-Hijaz is Makka; among its towns are Yathrib, Yanbuʿ, Qurh, Khaybar, al-Marwa, al-Hawra’, Judda, al-Ta’if, al-Jar, al-Suqya (YazId), aJ-ʿAwnId, al-Juhfa, and al-CUshayra: these are the larger towns. Lesser towns are Badr, Khulays, Amaj, al-Hijr, Bada Yaʿqob, al-Suwariqiyya, al-Furʿ, al-Sayra, Jabala, Mahayiʿ, Hadha.
p. 69
6
THE PENINSULA OF THE ARABS
Map IV: Arabia (see p. 408).
From MS. Sprenger 5—Ahlwardt 6034 by kind permission of the Staatsbibliothek Preussischer Kulturbesitz, Berlin, Orientabteilung.
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
66
Al-Yaman is in two divisions, one towards the sea, lowl ying, and named Tihama. Its capital is Zabld, and its towns include the following: Maʿqir, Kadra, Mawr, ʿAtana, al-Sharja, Duwayma, al-Hamidha, Ghalafiqa, Mukha, Kamaran, al-Hirda, al-Lasʿa, Sharma, al-ʿAshira, Ranqa, al-Khasof, al-Saʿid, al-Mahjam, and there are others. Here is the district of Abyan with towns ʿAdan and Lahj؛ the district of ʿAthr with towns Baysh, Haly, Sirrayn; also the district of al-Sarawiit. The part of al-Yaman towards the mountains is a cold area called Najd. Its capital is Sancaʾ and of its towns are Saʿda, Najran, Jurash, al-ʿUrf١ Jublan, al-Janad, Dhamar, Nasafan, Yahsib, al-Suhol, al-Mudhaykhira, Khawlan. Here also is the district of al-Ahqaf with just one town, Hadhramawt. Another district is Mahra, with chief town al-Shihr; there is also the district of Sabaʾ.
The capital of ʿUman is Suhar. Its towns are: Nazwa, al-Sirr, Dhank, Haflt, Daba, Salūt, Jullafar, Samad, Lasya, Milah. The capital of Hajar is al-Ahsaʾ; its towns Sabon, al-Zarqaʾ, Uwal, al-ʿUqayr. The district here is al-Yamama. Most of the towns of this Peninsula are small, yet have the full reputation of towns. I now turn to a description of the towns of the provinces, as far as is possible, and omit whatever is of no profit.
Makka, the metropolis of this region, is laid out around the Kaʿba, and is situated in a mountain valley. I have seen three other towns situated like this-ʿAmman in al-Sham, Istakhr in Fars, and Qaryat al-Hamraʾ in Khurasan. The buildings of Makka are of black smooth stone and some white stone; the upper parts are of baked brick. The houses commonly have projecting windows of teakwood, and are multistoreyed, whitewashed, and clean. It is hot in the summer, but the nights are pleasant; in any case God has lifted from them the trouble of heating their houses, and has relieved them of the cost of keeping themselves warm. The area that slopes down from al-Masjid al-Haram is known as al-Masfala (the lower quarter), what is higher is called al-Maʿalat (the upper). The width of the town is the width of the valley in which it lies. The Masjid,
longer than it is wide, is situated two-thirds of the way towards the Masfala quarter; the Kaʿba stands in its middle. The door of the Kaʿba is raised above the ground about six feet; it consists of two leaves overlaid with silver, chased with gold. The door faces east. The length of the Masjid is three hundred seventy
cubits, its width three hundred fifteen cubits. The Kaʿba measures twenty-four cubits and a span by twenty-three cubits and a span. The measurement around al-Hijr (enclosure) is twenty-five cubits; the distance of the tawaf[seven-fold circumambulations of the Kaʿba during the Pilgrimage] is one hundred seven cubits. The height of the Kaʿba is twenty-seven cubits. The Hijr is on the side towards al-Sham; it is like a barn, and the miziib (drainpipe) discharges onto it. Its walls, which are waist-high, as well as its floor, are faced with white marble; it is also called al-Hatim. The tawafpasses from behind it, and it is not lawful to pray facing it. Should someone then maintain that as the tawafcan be performed around this place only, it follows that it is lawful to say prayers facing it, I should
p. 70
p. 71
D
p. 72
67
THE PENINSULA OF THE ARABS
say that this is a matter that may not be simply comprehended, as there is an ambiguity here [whether or not the Hijr forms part of the KaCba]; so that it is necessary to be cautious here with respect to both aspects of the matter.
Al-Hajar al-Aswad (The Black Stone) is in the east corner of the Kaʿba, close to the door, and set into the point of the corner itself. It is shaped like a man's head, and a person kissing it must bend slightly. The domed structure over the well of Zamzam is opposite to the door of the Kaʿba, and the course of the tawiif runs between the two. Behind Zamzam is Qubbat al-Sharab (the Dome of Drink) where is a reservoir in which sawiq (a porridge) and wine were provided in former times.
The Maqiim [standing stone of Abraham] is immediately in front of the middle of the wall of the house in which is the door; it is closer to the Kaʿba than Zamzam, so is included in the course of the tawiif during the days of the Pilgrimage. A great iron chest is over it, fixed firmly in the ground, its height greater than the height of a man. This is covered with a cloth. Every year the Maqiim is lifted into the house, and when it is returned to its place a wooden p. 73 housing is put over it, with a door which is opened when prayers are said. As the Imam ends the prayers he touches the stone, and the door is then closed. The Maqiim bears the mark of the feet of Abraham, with the positions ofthe right and the left transposed. It is black, and is bigger than the Black Stone.
The ground of the tawfis strewn with sand, and that of the mosque with gravel. Around the courtyard are three porticoes on pillars of white marble, which al-MahdI brought there from Alexandria, by sea, to Judda. The mosque is of his building. The walls of the porticoes on the outside are decorated with mosaic, for which artisans were brought from al-Sham and Misr; you may still see their names on it.
The mosque has nineteen gates: the gate of Banū Shayba, the gate of the Prophet, the gate of Bano Hashim, the gate of the Oil-merchants, the gate of the Cloth-merchants, the gate of the Fullers, the gate of Banū Makhzūm, the gate of al-SafA, the gate of Zuqaq al-ShatawI, the gate of the Date-sellers, the gate of Dar al-WazIr, the gate of Jiyad, the gate of al-Hazwara, the gate of Ibrahim, the gate of Banū Sahm, the gate of Banū Jumah, the gate of al-ʿAjala, the gate of al-Nadwa, the gate of al-Bishara. The market places of the town are on the east and south sides, and the buildings and the lodging houses for the Egyptians are on the west. The course of al-sa'y [the ceremony, during the Pilgrimage, of come-and-go seven times] between al-Safa and al-Marwa runs through the eastern market, the dash being from the corner of the mosque to the gate of Banū HilShim. Here are green pillars. Behind these two markets are two other markets which carry to the end of the MaCalat (upper quarter) with passageways between them. A pilgrim entering from the way of al-ʿIraq seeking the gate of the Banū Shayba needs to turn to the right, proceeding through Sūq (the market of) Raʾs al-Radam, not by way of Sūq al-Layl. On the other hand, Egyptians making for this gate, as soon as they arrive at al-Jarrahiyya, outside the
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
68
town, have to turn towards the left to the Thaniyya, then descend to the p. 74 cemeteries to reach the entrance of those coming from al-ʿIrāq. The town is entered from three sides, one gate on the Mina side towards al-ʿIrāq, where are two roads; another is on the road of al-ʿ٧mra; the third is the road of al Yaman in al-Masfala. All these gates are covered with iron plates, for the town is well-fortified. Mount Abu Qubays overlooks the mosque; one ascends to it from al-Safa by a flight of steps. The area of the tawaf is surrounded by pillars of bronze and wooden posts, from which candelabra are suspended for wax tapers lighted in the name of the rulers of Misr, al-Yaman, and the Shar, the ruler of Gharjistan. In Makka are three reservoirs filled from a canal which Zubayda caused to be cut from Bustan Bani ʿAmir; there are also wells of rather middling water. Their houses are their only sources of revenue to the people here.
. Abu Bakr bin ʿAbdan al-Shirazi told me that he had it from ʿAli bin al-Husayn ibn Maʿdan that he had it from Muhammad bin Sulayman Luwayn al-MassIsI that he had it from Abu al-Ahus on the authority of al-ʿAshʿath bin Salim on the authority of al-Aswad bin Yazid, to the effect that ʿAʾisha-God be pleased with her-recounted: “I once asked the Prophet-God's peace and blessings be upon him-whether the Hijr is part of the Sacred House. He answered, ‘Yes.' I then asked him: ‘Then why have they not included it in the House?' He said that the people fell short of funds for the cost. I also asked him concerning the door of the House, why it is raised above the ground. He replied: ‘Your people did so that they might admit whom they willed to enter, and deny whom they willed. And indeed, were it not that your people had only recently been in contact with paganism, so that I feared that their hearts would be changed, I should certainly have considered including the Hijr in the House, and fixing the door on a level with the ground.'"
Ibn al-Zubayr is said to have brought in ten of the chief Companions of the Prophet to hear this from ʿAʾisha herself. He then ordered the Kaʿba to be pulled down. The people gathered against him and protested this action, but he rejected their representations that he not demolish it. The people fled a farsakh away, in dread of the enormity of the deed and the descent of punishment on themselves. However, nothing but good came of it, and he rebuilt it in accord with what ʿAʾisha had told him, and the people returned.
When al-Hajjaj invested the city [72/692], Ibn al-Zubayr sought the sanctuary of the Kaʿba. Al-Hajjaj positioned the catapult on the Hill of Abu p. 75 Qubays, and said: “Destroy the additions which this presumptuous heretic has made." So they bombarded the site of al-Hatim; and he had Ibn al-Zubayr taken out and crucified. He restored the wall to what it had been formerly. Moreover, he took of the stones that were left over, closed up the western door with them, and paved the House with the remainder, so that they would not be lost.
I heard the following from one of the elders of al-Qayrawan. Said he: “When al-Mansur went on the Pilgrimage, he was struck by the smallness of the Holy Sanctuary, its state of disrepair, and the scant recognition of its sanctity. In fact,
69
THE PENINSULA OF THE ARABS
he saw the Bedouin doing the rounds of the tawiifon camel or dromedary. This grieved him, so he decided on buying the houses around there, adding them to it, making it grander, and plastering it. He accordingly assembled the owners of the houses and tempted them with the offcr of a considerable sum of money for them. They, however, declined and would not sell the houses, unwilling to give up their proximity to the sacred house of God. This distressed al-Mansūr, but he would not usurp ownership of the houses. He accordingly did not show himself to anyone for three days, and this caused much comment. Now it happened. that Abo Hanlfa was on the Pilgrimage that year, while as yet not become well-known, nor had people become acquainted with his learning, or the soundness of his opinions. He went straight to the camp of al-Mansor, which was in al-Abtah, and enquired about the Commander of the Faithful, and the reason he had concealed himself. When the facts were related to him, he said: “This is an easy matter to resolve, and should I meet him I will show him how." This was told to al-MansOr, who bade Abo Hanlfa come before him. When he enquired of him on the matter, Abo Hanlfa said: “May the Commander of the Faithful have them brought to his presence, and let him ask: ‘Did this Kaʿba descend to you, or did you descend on it’ Were they to say: ‘It descended on us’; that could be refuted, because it is from here that all the earth was stretched out. Were they to say: ‘It is we, ourselves, who have settled down around it,’ they should be told in answer that ‘the number of visitors has become so great and the area around it so limited, the greater right attaches to the surrounding space, so you must vacate it.’" Having assembled them and asked them the question, their spokesman, a man of the tribe ofHashim said: “We ourselves came down on it." “Then," said he, “restore its space, for its visitors have grown many, and there is need for it." They were completely confounded, and agreed to the sale. This narrative confirms one of the two opinions attributed to Abo Hanlfa, in his aversion to selling the houses of Makka, or the acceptance of rent for them; but perhaps there is another explanation.
The town of Mina, a farsakh from Makka, is part of the holy territory, and is two miles long. It is peopled in the season of the Pilgrimage, but devoid of inhabitants the rest of the year, except for those who have the safekeeping of it. Abu al-Hasan al-Karkhl used to allege in vindication of Abo Hanlfa the legality of saying the Friday prayers there, on the grounds that Mina and Makka are like one metropolis. When, however, Abo Bakr al-Jassas went on the Pilgrimage, and perceived the distance between the two places, he considered the argument deficient. He said that it is, indeed, one of the metropoles of the Muslims, populous at one season, empty at another, its evacuation not excluding it from the category of metropoles. The Qadhl Abu al-Hasan al-Qāzwlnl maintains the same view. He asked me one day how many people lived there throughout the year. “Twenty or thirty men,’’ said I, “and there is hardly a campsite there in which you do not find a woman taking care of it." Said he, “Abu Bakr is right, and was quite correct in what he taught you about this." In my meeting the
p. 76
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
70
jurist, Abu Hamid al-BaghOlanl, in Naysabur, I told him the foregoing, and he said: “The argument lies with what Abu al-Hasan stipulates. Do you not consider the saying of God - glory to His name: ‘Then the sacrifice shall take place at the ancient House,’ (Quran, sura 22, v. 33), and also: ‘An offering to reach the Kaʿba?’ (Quran, sura 5, v. 95) And in fact the sacrifice occurs at Mina."
Few are the towns of any importance in Islam that do not have a campsite there for their inhabitants. At the entrance of the town, to the side towards Makka, is a pass (ʿAqaba), on which the pebbles are cast on Yawn al-Nahr [the Day of Sacrifice-tenth day of the month of Pilgrimage], as well as the three following days: the first (heap of pebbles) is near Masjid al-Khayf(Mosque of the Slope), the middle one between the first heap and that ofal-ʿAqaba. Mina consists of two valleys, each with its own pathways. The Masjid (al-Khayf) is on the right-hand road, and the Masjid al-Kabsh [the ram sacrificed by Abraham] close to the pass.
In Mina are wells, water tanks, commercial houses, stores. The town is well-built, being of stone and teakwood, and is situated between two mountains that overlook it.
Al-Muzdalifa is distant a farsakh from Mina. It has an oratory, a public p. 77 fountain, a minaret, and a number of ponds ofwater. It lies towards the mountain of Thablr, of which Arabs used to say: “Shine, 0 Thablr, that we may move." But there are variants on this. Al-Muzdalifa is also called Jamʿ [place where people collect themselves], and al-Mashʿar [place for performance of religious ceremonies] al-Haram.
ʿArafa is a village in which are planted fields, vegetable gardens, ■ and melon patches; here are substantial houses belonging to the people ofMakka which they occupy on the Day of ʿArafa. The place of standing is within shouting distance of it, near a low, flat mountain; here are public fountains, reservoirs, and a flowing canal. A guidepost has been erected here behind which the Imam stands making the invocation, the people around him standing on the hillocks nearby. The Musalla [place of prayer] is on the edge of the valley of ʿUrana on the outskirts of ʿArafa. Standing in the valley itself is not permitted, and should anyone go out to it before the setting of the sun, he is obliged to atone by a blood sacrifice. On the boundary of ʿArafa are white pillars, and in the place of prayer is a pulpit of baked brick, behind that a large pond. Two miles ahead of that is al-Maʾzimayn (the two straits), the limit of al-Haram. Batn Muhassir is a valley between Mina and al-Muzdalifa, forming the boundary of al-Muzdalifa.
Al-TanʿIm is a place in which a number of mosques stand around Masjid ʿĀʾisha, also drinking fountains. It is on the road to al-Madlna. From here the Makkans go in their ihriim [two seamless sheets, of wool or linen, usually white] during the ceremonies of the ʿUmra. White pillars surround the Haram (sacred precinct) which stretches three miles to the west on the road to al-Tanʿīm; on the road of al-Iraq nine miles, on the road of al-Yaman, seven miles, on the road of al-Taʾʾf, eleven miles, and on the main highway, ten miles.
71
THE PENINSULA OF THE ARABS
Dhu al-Hulayfa is a village near Yathrib, having a good mosque, with wells close by; but you see no one around here. Al-Juhfa is a thriving city inhabited by the BanO Jaʿfar; it is protected with a fortress having two gates. There are some wells here; and two miles away is a spring. It has a large reservoir, though sometimes the water runs scarce. Fevers are quite common. I was informed of the following tradition by Shafiʿ bin Muhammad who had it from ʿAll bin al-Rajaʾ, who had it from Abū CUtba, who had it from Muhammad bin Yūsuf, who had it from Sufyan on the authority ofHisham bin CUrwa, who had it on the authority of his father, who had it from ʿAʾisha. Said she: “The Messenger of God-God’s peace and blessings be upon him-said: ‘0 God! Endear al-Madlna to us as you have endeared Makka, and even more so; and transfer its fevers to al-Juhfa' ".
Qarn is a small town beyond al-Taʾʾf, on the road to San<aʾ. Yalamlam is a way station on the road to Zabld; thriving. Dhat ʿlrq, a village with some wells from which water is easily drawn; it is an arid, gloomy place two stages away from Makka.
Ibrahim bin ʿAbd Allah al-Isbahanl related to me a tradition, saying that he had it from Muhammad bin Ishaq al-Sarraj, who had it from Qutayba bin Saʿid, who had it from al-Layth bin Saʿd, who had it from Nafiʿ the Mawla of ibn CUmar, on the authority ofʿAbd Allah bin CUmar: A man stood up in the Masjid and said: “0 Messenger of God, from what place do you direct us to begin the Pilgrimage?" Said the Messenger of God-God's peace and blessings be upon him-in reply: “The people of al-Madlna begin at Dhu al-Hulayfa, the people of al-Sham at al-Juhfa, the people ofNajd at Qarn." Ibn CUmar says, moreover, that there are those who assert that the Messenger of God-God's peace and blessings be upon him-said also, on another occasion: “The people ofal-Yaman begin at Yalamlam, the people of al-ʿIrāq at Dhat ʿlrq."
Al-Dhablb is the miqiit (rendezvous) for pilgrims coming from the west; it is a mountain on the sea coast across from al-Juhfa; Shiqqan, the rendezvous for the people of al-Yaman, is on the sea and faces Yalamlam. ʿAydhab is a town across from Judda, and anyone coming on the Pilgrimage from this direction, here assumes the ihriim. These, then, are the points of rendezvous for the provinces; should anyone pass beyond them on his way to Makka and then return, and if he had uttered his call of Labbayka [God, here I am at your service!], the requirement of a blood sacrifice from him is annulled. Some say, however, that it is not annulled; some others maintain that it is annulled even if the talbiya [a prayer of obedience recited during the Pilgrimage] was not said. A pilgrim from the provinces may not pass beyond a rendezvous without having assumed the ihriim. This is true even if it is not his assigned rendezvous, as if, for example, a Syrian passes through Dhu al-Hulayfa. The rendezvous of the Makkans on pilgrimage is, of course, the city itself.
Al-Jiʿrana is distant one stage from Makka; people have to go out to it to assume the ihriim for the CUmra [a pilgrimage at Makka lesser than the Hajj].
p. 78
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
72
These, then, are the ceremonial places of ritual for the Pilgrimage. In all, the rituals performed there comprise: three Fariihdh [sing. Farīdhaaluty enjoined in the Quriin or in a tradition], six Wajibat [sing. Wajiba--obligation, though possibly not enjoined in the Quriin or tradition], and five Sunan [sing. Sunna— that which was said or done by the Prophet]. The Faraʾidh are: al-Ihriim, the WuqUf(standing) at ʿArafa, and the Tawiif(circumambulations) lil-Ziyara. The Wajibiit are: assuming the ritual garb from the rendezvous point, the saJ! or the to-and-fro between al-Saff and al-Marwa, and descent from ʿArafat after sunset. The Sunan are the tawiif on arrival, making three circumambulations at a trot, the to-and-fro in the saJ! between the two pillars, the descent from al-Muzdaliff before dawn, and staying at Mina during the special days known as the days of Mina. Some maintain that the saJ! is a Fardh (duty), some that the tawiifof arrival is a Wajib, and that the tawiifat dawn is a Sunna.
We now return to a description of the towns of this area, and its districts, in order.
Al-Ta’if is a small town, Syrian in climate and in the coolness of its water. Most of the fruits of Makka are from here. Pomegranates abound here, raisins, excellent grapes, superb fruits. It is situated on the back ofJabal Ghazwan, so the water freezes here at times. Tanneries are the commonest places of work here. When the elite of Makka find the heat unbearable they come to this town.
Judda is a city on the seashore, from which circumstance it derives its name. A fortified, well-developed, populous place, its people are merchants, and well-to-do; it is the granary of Makka, the entrepot of al-Yaman and Misr. Here is a distinguished mosque. However, the people here suffer great inconvenience from deficiency of water, though the town has many reservoirs; water has to be brought from some distance away. The Persians are the predominant class there, where they have splendid mansions. Its streets are straight, the situation excellent, but the heat is excessive.
Amaj is a small town with five forts, two of stone and three of clay; the mosque is right on the side of the road. Khulays adjoins it, and here are a reservoir, a canal, varieties of dates, vegetable gardens, and cultivated fields. Al-Suwariqiyya has many forts, and many gardens, cultivated fields, and livestock. Al-Furʿ and al-Sayra are two forts in each one of which is a moque. Jabala is a large town, with many commercial establishments; over it stands an impregnable fortress called al-Muhd, the mosque standing outside it. Mahayiʾ compares with Jabala, and both stand above the valleys ofSaya. Hadha is a beautiful town peopled by descendants of Abū Bakr; it has a number of forts, and a large mosque.
Yathrib (al-Madlna)-this is the City of the Prophet-God’s peace and blessings be upon him. We treat it here as a district because it is surrounded by important towns and has access to well-known maritime amenities. It is Less than half the size of Makka. For most of its environs, gardens, groves of palm trees, and villages surround it. There are a few cultivated fields, and water ofbut middling quality. There are cisterns here into which some ducts spill, situated
p. 79
p. so
73
THE PENINSULA OF THE ARABS
near the gates of the city, and reached by a set ofsteps. ʿUmar, God be pleased with him, had a canal constructed leading to the gate of the mosque, but it has fallen into disuse. The marketplaces are close to the mosque. The town is bright and splendid. The people are, for the most part, descendants ofHusayn, the son of ʿAli, God be pleased with them both. The buildings here are of clay, the soil is rather saline, the population scant. The mosque is situated two thirds of the way through the town towards BaqIʿ al-Gharqad; it is on the model of the mosque of Damascus, and not large. This, and the mosque of Damascus were built by Walld, son of ʿAbd al-Malik; however, the ʿAbbasids have added to it. The Prophet himself-God's peace and blessings be upon him-said: “Even if this mosque were extended as far as Sancaʾ, it would still be my mosque."
The first person to enlarge it was ʿUmar, God be pleased with him, extending it from the pillars which face the maqsūra [enclosed place set apart in mosque, usually occupied during prayers by ruler] at the present time, to the southern wall. Next ʿUthman, God be pleased with him, added to it from near the place of the Qjbla to its present location. AftCT that al-Walld extended it, but he did not extend it for the glory of God, but on account of the house of al-Hasan the son of al-Hasan bin ʿAli, God be pleased with him; the door of this was within the mosque, so he could emerge from it during the prayer. It was built of pointed stone and mosaic. ʿUmar bin ʿAbd aJ-ʿAzIz١ God be pleased with him, supervised the building of it; and when he was about to pull down the mihrab, he called to p. si the elders of the Muhajirūn and the Ansar and said to them: “Be present at the building of your Qjbla, so that you do not say, ‘Umar changed it.”'
The extension made by al-Walld ran from the east to the west, comprising six pillars; and he extended it in the direction of al-Sham, beginning with the square pillar in the necropolis, fourteen pillars, of which ten are in the courtyard and four in the porticoes. Then when al-Mahdl made the Pilgrimage in the year 160/776, he added to the mosque one hundred cubits in the direction of al-Sham, an extent of ten pillars. Accordingly, its length today is one hundred fifty-four cubits, its width one hundred sixty-three cubits. The length of the courtyard is one hundred sixty-five cubits, its width, one hundred sixty-five cubits.
It is said that al-Walld wrote to the king of the Romaeans: “We desire to restore the great mosque of our Prophet; so help me in this with artisans and mosaic work." He accordingly sent him a number of loads, and more than twenty craftsmen, among them ten whose services were the equivalent of one hundred eighty thousand dinars. It is said that on an occasion these men were alone in the mosque, and one of them stood and said: “I will piss on the grave of their Prophet," but when he released his drawers he was dry.
Men are not in agreement about the respective positions of the graves of the Prophet-God’s peace and blessings be upon him-and of his two companions. This is one account: the Prophet, behind him Abū Bakr, then behind him, ʿUmar. According to the account of Malik ibn Anas, the Prophet is to the western side
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
74
ofthe house, opposite him is a vacant space; behind the Prophet is Abo Bakr, and beyond the vacant space, ʿUmar. The vacant space was that mentioned to ʿUmar bin ʿAbd al-ʿAzlz, but he did not consider himself worthy of it. It is said that here Isa, peace be upon him, will be buried.
I have been told the following tradition by Abo Bakr Muhammad bin ʿAll al-Faqlh, in Sii.wa, who had it from Muhammad bin Hilal al-Shii.shl, who had it from Muhammad bin Ishii.q, who had it from Yonus, who had it from Muhammad bin Ismaʿll bin Abo Fudayk, on the authority of ʿAmr bin ʿUthmii., on the authority of Qasim: “I went to ʿĀʾisha and said, C()h Mother, disclose to us the grave of the Messenger of God-God’s peace and blessings be upon him-and of his two companions,’ and she pointed out three graves to me, neither raised, nor lowered, but just level with the ground of al-ʿArsa al-Hamril.’ (the red courtyard). And I saw the grave of the Prophet-God’s peace and p. S2 blessings be upon him-in front, Abo Bakr was near his head, his feet between the shoulders of the Prophet; while ʿUmar had his head at the feet of the Prophet—God's peace and blessings be upon him!"
The pulpit is in the middle of the roofed part of the mosque; it forms a covering for the pulpit of the Prophet—God’s peace and blessings be upon him-placad in a garden paved with marble. This storied garden is beside a red pillar, between the pulpit and the grave. I read in the records of al-Madina that Mucawiya ordered the pulpit taken to the side of the mihrab, just as all pulpits are; but when they set about moving it the town itself quaked, and bolts of lightning appeared nearby; so he said: “Leave it as it is,'’ and ordered the making of the present pulpit over it. This latter has five steps, the first one but three. The mosque has twenty gates. The city itself has really splendid gates, four in number: the gate ofal-Baql(, the gate ofal-Thaniyya, the gate ofJuhayna, and the gate of al-Khandaq. Al-Khandaq, (the fosse) is on the Makkan side. Al-Madlna is splendidly provided with a towering fortress.
Al-BaqIʿ is to the east of al-Madlna. The soil around here is salty. Here is the grave of Ibrahim, son of the Prophet-God’s peace and blessings be upon him—and the graves of al-Hasan, and of a number of the Companions. The grave of ʿUthman is at the remote end.
Quba is a village two miles away, on the left side of the road to Makka; it has many buildings of stone. It has the Masjid al-Taqwil. [Mosque of Veneration— Qurʾan, sora 9, v. 108]: this is a well-built mosque, in front of it a paved court and an open area. It has many places associated with the Prophet. The water here is fresh. Here also is Masjid al-Dhirār [Mosque of Mischief--urʾān, sora 9, v. 107] in the pulling down of which the people performed a pious deed.
Uhud is a hill three miles distant [from al-Madlna]. By it is the grave of Hamza situated in a mosque, before which is a well, beside it an enclosure containing the graves of the Martyrs [killed in the battle at Uhud]. On this hill is a place wherein the Prophet-God’s peace and blessings be upon himtence concealed himself. It is the hill nearest to al-Madina.
75
THE PENINSULA OF THE ARABS
Al-ʿAqlq is a thriving village two miles distant, in the direction ofMakka, and here the governor resides. Its water is fresh. All the area between the two ridges of al-Madlna is a precinct as sacred as the sacred precinct of Makka itself. p. 83 Badr is a small town situated towards the coast; the dates here are excellent. Here are found ʿAyn al-Nabl (the spring of the ProphetfGod's peace and blessings be upon him-and the site of the battle [fought 19 Ramadhan A.H. 2/C.E. 15 March 624] and a number of mosques which the rulers of Egypt founded.
Al-Jar is on the seacoast. It is fortified on three sides by a wall, the quarter facing the sea being open. It has lofty dwellings and a thriving market. It is the granary of al-Madlna and its towns. Water is carried thither from Badr, grain from Egypt. The mosque is without a courtyard.
Al-ʿUshayra is a small town on the coast, opposite to Yanbuʿ. It has some date palms and an incomparable caravanserai.
Yanbuʿ is a large splendid town, well fortified by a wall. It has an abundant supply of water. It is more flourishing than Yathrib, and has more groves of date palms. The fortress is well-built, the markets bustling. It has two gates, close to one of which stands the mosque. Predominant here are the descendants of al-Hasan. Raʾs al-ʿAyn is twelve miles distant.
Al-Marwa is a fortified town with an abundance of palm trees and excellent dates. The drinking water is derived from a canal that flows abundantly. Around it is a ditch, and the gates are iron. It is a source of the doom palm, and of an excellent variety of dates known as burdi. It is hot here in the summer. The Banū Jaʿfar predominate here.
Al-Hawraʾ is the port of Khaybar; it has a fortress, and the suburbs are densely inhabited; the market here is on the side towards the sea.
Khaybar is a fortified town, somewhat resembling al-Marwa. It has a very good mosque. Nearby is the gate which the Prince of the Faithful snatched up [ʿAli, on dropping his shield in the attack]. This town and al-Marwa and al-Hawraʾ are the towns of the district of Khaybar.
The district of Qurh is also called Wadi '1-Qura. There is not in al-Hijaz today, aside from Makka, a town more important, more thriving, more populous, with more commerce, wealth, and natural products, than this town [Qurh]. It is p. 84 protected by an impregnable stronghold from one corner of which a castle rises. Villages surround it, and palms shelter it round about. Dates here are cheap, breads excellent, its waters abundant, its residences delightful. The markets bustle with people. A ditch surrounds the town, and it has three gates with iron plates affixed. The mosque stands facing on some alleys, and in its mihriib is a bone said to be that which spoke to the Prophet-God's peace and blessings upon him-saying: “Do not eat me, for I am poisoned." This town is, indeed, Syrian, Egyptian, Iraqi, and Hijazl all together in one. However, its water is indigestible, its dates of middling quality. The public bath is outside the town. Most of the people there are Jews.
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
76
Al-Hijr is a small fortified town with many wells and cultivated fields. The mosque of Salih is close by on an eminence; it is as if a gallery had been excavated from the rock. Here are to be found the wonders ofThamnd and their dwelling places. Suqya Yazld is the finest town in this area; palm groves and orchards join it in a continuous line with Qurh. The mosque is outside the town. Bada Yaʿqūb is on the main road to Egypt, thriving and populous. Al-ʿAwnīd is the port of Qurh: a thriving town, producing plenty of honey, and having a fine anchorage.
Zabld, the capital of Tihama, is one of its two metropoles, this being the residence of the kings of al-Yaman. It is a splendid, well-built town, and popularly called “the Baghdad of al-Yaman." The inhabitants are reasonably polite, and among them are merchants, nobles, scholars, litterateurs. It is a profitable place for one who visits it, a blessed place for one who lives there. Their wells are sweet, their baths clean. Over it is a fortress built of clay, and it has four gates: Bab Ghalafiqa, Bab ʿAdan, Bab Hisham (Siham), and Bab Shabariq. Around it are villages and cultivated fields. It is more populous than Makka, bigger, and more prosperous. Their buildings are mostly of brick, their residences spacious and in good condition. The mosque, which is some distance from the markets, is clean, and the floor is cemented. Beneath the pulpit is a hollow, so that the rows of worshippers will be continuous. Ibn Ziyad had a channel led to the town. It is an attractive town, without equal in al-Yaman. However, the markets are cramped, prices are high, fruits scarce. Their food for the most part consists of millet and sorghum.
Maʿqir is on the road to ʿAdan, as are ʿAbra, Ghara, and al-Makhnaq: these are all small towns.
ʿAdan is a splendid, flourishing, populous town, fortified, and with a pleasant climate. It is the corridor of al-Sīn, the seaport of al-Yaman, the granary of al-Maghrib, an entrepot of various kinds of merchandise. There are many mansions in it. It is a source of good fortune to those who visit it, a source of prosperity to those who settle in it. The mosques are excellent, the means of earning a livelihood abundant. The mode oflife is pure, prosperity evident on all sides. Indeed, the Prophet-God's peace and blessings be upon him-gave his blessing to the markets of Mina and ʿAdan. The town is shaped like a sheepfold, the mountains surrounding it altogether, encircling it down to the sea. An inlet of the sea passes behind this mountain, so that it is approached only by crossing this inlet, and thus arriving at the mountain. A pass, truly remarkable, has been cut in the rock, at its adit an iron gate. On the side towards the sea, a wall, pierced by five gates, extends from one extremity of the mountain to the other. The mosque is distant from the markets. The water in the wells is somewhat salty, so recourse is had to a number of cisterns. It is said that in olden times this place was the prisonhouse of Shaddad, the son of ʿA. d. However, it is a barren, gloomy place, without cultivation or stockfarming, without trees, fruits, water, grazing. Conflagrations and shipwrecks are frequent here; the mosque is
p. S5
77
THE PENINSULA OF THE ARABS
neglected, in disorder, and filthy, the baths in disarray. Water is carried thither from a distance of one stage.
Abyan is older than ʿAdan, ʿAdan being in close relation with it, because the inhabitants ofʿAdan derive their wheat, fruits and vegetables from there, as there are many villages and cultivated fields around it. Such also is Lahj. Mandam (Mandab) is a crowded town on the sea. Sailing ships are detained here by the wind. It is a rather squalid town.
Mukha is a flourishing town depending on Zabid; it produces a large p. 86 quantity of sesame oil. The inhabitants derive their drinking water from a spring outside the town. The mosque is on the outskirts of the town towards the shore.
Ghalafiqa is the port of Zabid; a mosque here is right on the shore; this they hold in special respect, and attend assiduously to pray. It is a flourishing populous town, having palm plantations, coconut groves, and wells of fresh water. However, the climate is pestilential, and fatal to foreigners.
Al-Sharja, and al-Hirda, and ʿAtana are towns on the coast: here are the granaries for the sorghum exported to ʿAdan and Judda. While it is a land of milk, water must be brought to it from a distance. The mosques here are on the seashore.
The province of ʿAthr: this is an important district governed by an independent ruler, and having prosperous towns. ʿAthr is a large, fine town and very well-known, being the capital of the area, and the port of San<aʾ and Sa١!a. It has a fine market, a well-built mosque. Water has to be brought to the town from a distance, and the public bath is filthy. Baysh has a better climate than ʿAthr and purer water. Here the ruler resides, his house standing beside the mosque. Al-Jurayb is a town known for its bananas; it is the most prosperous town of the area, and, it seemed to me, the most remarkable.
Haly is a coastal town, flourishing, prosperous, and well endowed. Al-Sirrayn is a small town with a fort within which stands the mosque. At the gate of the town is a reservoir for storing rain-water. It is the port ofal-Sarawat. Al-Sarawat is the source of grain, abounding in good things, having some inferior varieties of dates, and much honey. I do not know whether these places are towns or just villages, because I did not enter them.
San<aʾ is the capital of Najd al-Yaman. It used to be more important than Zabid, more prosperous, and the prestige attached to it. However, now it has greatly deteriorated, though there are still in it learned men whose likes I have not seen in all of al-Yaman, in bearing and intellect. This is a spacious city with abundance of fruits; prices are low, bread is good, and it has profitable merchandise. It is larger than Zabid; and do not even ask about the excellence of the climate, because it is superb! Along with this, it is a friendly, kindly place. p. 87 Saʿda is smaller than San<aʾ, a flourishing town in the mountains. Here are made the finest leather water bottles, excellent leather mats, and the best tanned skins are exported from here. It is the city of the ʿAlawiyya, and their seat of government.
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
78
Jurash is of medium size, with date palms, though al-Yaman is not a country of palms. Najrlln is about the size ofJurash, and each one of them is smaller than Saʿda. Most of the leathers you see come from these towns.
Al-Himyarl, that is, the city of Qahtan [ancestor of the Himyarites], is between Zabld and San'aʾ, and has many villages. The climate is bad and noxious, but the traders do well here. Al-Ma'afir is a spacious district, with cultivated fields, villages, and natural advantages.
Sabaʾ is a district beyond these areas. The town itself is flourishing, but the area around is desolate.
Hadhramawt is the capital of al-Ahqaf, built in the sands at some distance from the shore. It is a flourishing and populous place, the inhabitants inclined to learning and philanthropy; yet, they lean to heresy. The colour of their skin is quite dark.
Al-Shihr is a town on the sea, an important centre for enormous fishes, which are exported to ʿUman and ʿAdan, thence to al-Basra, and to the towns of al-Yaman. Here are trees of which the resin is frankincense.
The site of Iram of the Columns betrays no trace of its remains; from Lahj to it is a distance of two farsakhs, over level ground. You may see it glimmering from a long way off, but as you approach it you see not a thing. The water of ʿAdan is brought from here.
Sakhln is a town belonging to a tribe of the Quraysh known as Bano Sllma;
I have heard that they number four thousand archers. Al-Shuqra consists of the dwellings of Khathʿam [a tribe]; palm trees and villages surround it.
You should realize that al-Yaman is an extensive country, in which I spent one whole year visiting those towns I have described. However, much of it is not personally known to me, but I will recount what I heard about it from those who are well-informed. I give an exhaustive list of its mikhfss (districts), though I have not visited them all, for it is a country distinguished by its mikhfs. I shall also give an account of the position and form of the Peninsula of the Arabs, along with a description of it that everyone will be able to understand, if it is the will of God, the Most High.
The makha/if(districts) of al-Yaman are:
The mikhf of San'aʾ; al-Khashab; Ruhaba; Marmal;
the mikhf of al-Bawn; the mikhf of Khaywan.
To the right of Sancaʾ, mikh/afShakir; Wlldiʿa; Yam; Arhab.
In the direction of al-Taʾif, the mikhf of Najran; Turaba; al-Hujayra;
Kuthba; Jurash; al-Sarat.
In Tihama the mikhf of Dhankan; ʿAsham; Blsha; ʿAkk. The mikhf of al-Hirda; the mikhf of Hamdan; the mikhf of Jawf Hamdan; the mikhf of Jawf Murad; the mikhf of Shanūʾa; Sudllʿ; Juʿfi; the mikhf of al-Jasra; the mikhf of al-Mashriq; Būshan; Ghudar; the mikhf of Aqll and Anʿum;
p. 88
p. 89
79
THE PENINSULA OF THE ARABS
al-Masnaʿtayn; Bani Ghutayf; Qaryat Maʾrib; the mikhliif of Hadhramawt; the mikhliif of Khawlan Rudaʿ; the mikhliif of Ahwar; the mikhliif of al-Haql; Dhimar; the mikhliif of Ibn ʿAmir; That; Radaʿ; the mikhliif of Dathina; the mikhliif of al-Sharaf; the mikhliif of Ruʿayn; Nasafan; Kahlan; the mikhliif p. 90 Dhankan; Dhubhan; the mikhliifof Nafiʿ; Masha; the mikhliifof Hujr and Badr; Akhalla; al-Suhayb; the mikhliif of al-Thujja; al-Mazraʿ; mikhliif Dhi Makarim; al-Umlok; the mikhliif of al-Salif; al-Adam; the mikhliif of Najlan; Nahb; the p. 91 mikhliifof al-Janad; the mikhliifof al-Sakasik. Towards al-Maʿafir: the mikhliif of al-Ziyadi; the mikhliif of al-Ma<afir; mikhliif Bani Majid; the mikhliif of al-Rakb; the mikhliif of Saqf; the mikhliif of al-Mudhaykhira; the mikhliif of Hamul; Sharʿab; the mikhliifof Vnna; Vnnaba. On the other side, the mikhliif of Wuhadha; the mikhliif of Sifl-Yahsib; the mikhliif of al-Qufaʿa; al-Wazlra; al-Hujr. The mikhliifof Zabid, opposite to which is the coast of Ghalafiqa and the coast of al-Mandab; the mikhliifof Rimaʿ; the mikhliifof Muqra; the mikhliif of Alhan; the mikhliifofJublan; the mikhliif Dhi Jura; the mikhliif of al- Maytam (al-Batam); the mikhliifof al-Yamm(?) On the farther side of San<aʾ: the mikhliif of Khawlan; the mikhliif of Misariʿ; the mikhliif of Haraz and Hawzan; the p. 92 mikhliifof al-UkhrOj; the mikhliifof Majnah; the mikhliifof Hadhor; the mikhliif of Majin; the mikhliifof Wadhiʿ; al- Maʿlal; al- CUsba; the mikhliifof Khunas (Hiyadh); Milhan; Hakam and Jazan; Marsa 'l-Sharja; the mikhliifof Hajor; the mikhliif of Qudum; and opposite it the village of Mahjara; the mikhliifof Hayya and al- Kawdan; the mikhliif of Maskh; the mikhliif of Kinda and al-Sakon; the mikhliifof al-Sadif.
Suhar is the capital of Vman, and there is not on the Sea of China today a more important town than it. It is a flourishing, populous, beautiful, pleasant, and delightful place. It has prosperity, and a merchant class, and is blessed with fruits and natural resources. It is more distinguished than Zabld and San<aʾ. It has remarkable markets; and this charming town is stretched along the shore of the sea. Its houses, towering and elegant, are built of baked brick and teakwood. The mosque here is on the seashore, and situated at the extreme end of the markets, with a beautiful high minaret. There are wells of middling water, a canal of fresh water, and an abundance of goods of all kinds. It is the gateway to China, the storehouse of the East and of al-ʿIraq, and the promptuary of al-Yaman. Persians predominate here. The open place appointed for prayer is in the midst of date palms.
Masjid Suhar is a half farsakh away; there it was knelt the camel of the p. 93 Messenger of God—God's peace and blessings be upon him. Its construction is ofthe very finest style; and the climate here is superior to that ofthe capital. The mihriib of the mosque turns on a gudgeon, now seen yellow, now green, now red. Nazwa is a large town close to the mountains; the buildings here are of mud. The mosque is in the middle of the marketplace, and when the river overflows in winter it floods it. The drinking water here is from streams and wells. Al-Sirr
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
80
is smaller than Nazwa; the mosque is in the market. The drinking water here is from streams and wells. It is completely surrounded with date palms. Dhank is a small town in the midst of palms. Authority here is always firm, as the inhabitants are heretical and refractory. Haflt abounds in palm trees; it lies in the direction of Hajar, and the mosque is in the markets. Saint is a large town to the left of Nazwa. Daba and Jullafar, both in the direction of Hajar, are close to the sea. Samad is a town ofNazwa. Lasya, Milah, Barzam, al-Qalaʿ, and Dhankan are other towns. Al-Masqat is the first place ships from al-Yaman encounter; I have seen it myself, a delightful place, with abundance of fruits. Tuʾam has been dominated by a branch of the Quraysh; they are men of fortitude and forcefulness. ʿUman is an important territory, measuring some eighty farsakhs in length as well as in breadth; it is virtually covered with date palms and gardens. Generally, the irrigation water is drawn from wells, the water of which is close to the surface; cattle draw it. Most of the wells are in the mountains. The people of these towns we have mentioned are heretical Arabs.
Al-Ahsa' is the capital of Hajar, which is also called al-Bahrayn. It is large, and abounding in date palms, flourishing, and populous. It is a place of heat and aridity. Situated at a distance of one stage from the sea, for the people there it is, p. 94 as it were, a cornucopia of merchandise! Nearby are some islands. This town is the place ofresidence of the Qaramita, partisans ofAbo SaʿJd. Good government and justice prevail here; however, the mosque is in disuse. Close by is the treasury of al-Mahdi, and they have other treasuries besides. Part of the wealth is kept in that, the remainder in their own treasuries. Al-Zarqaʾ and Sabnn are among their treasuries, as is also Uwal. The remaining towns are on the sea, or close to it. Al-Yamama is a district, the capital, al-Hajar. This is a large town, producing excellent dates. It is surrounded by forts and towns, one of which is al-Falaj.
You should know that the form of this Peninsula is that of a hall longer than it is wide, in which a couch has been placed from its front side to its door; between it and each of the two walls, to the right and left, is an empty space. The couch consists of two pieces: the inner piece represents Najd al-Yaman, a mountainous area in which lie Sanʿaʾ, Saʿda,Jurash, Najran, and the City of Qahtan. ʿAdan is at the front of the hall at the end ofthe Sarawat uplands, for the three walls are the Sea of China itself. These uplands are highly cultivated, producing grapes and corn. The open space on the right of the couch is Tihama in which is Zabld, with its towns. The open space on the left is called Najd al-Yaman, and here are al-Ahqaf, and Mahra, up to the borders of al-Yamama; some include this latter with ʿUman in this layout. This piece of the couch with the open spaces is al-Yaman. The piece of couch closest to the door of the hall is called al-Harra, extending from the borders of al-Yaman to Qurh: this is a range ofmountains entirely arid, nothing growing there except a little grazing for cattle, brambles, and panic grass. Here are situated al-Haram, al-ʿUmaq, and Maʿdin al-Naqira, and there are some barren areas. The open space on the right
81
THE PENINSULA OF THE ARABS
is called al-Hijilb. Al-Hijilz [Al-Hijilb?] is small in area; it contains Yanbuʿ, al-Marwa, and al-ʿAmls; also the coastal areas which are inhabited, and produce date palms. The open space on the left is called Najd al-Hijilz; in it are p. 95 al-Yamilma, and Fayd, and the halting places that are on the main road. This piece of the couch, with its spaces, is al-Hijaz, and Hajar is included in this; opposite to the door of the hall lies the desert. All this I have surveyed myself, and sectioned-and God knows best!
A Summary Account of Conditions in this Region This is an intensely hot region, except for the realm of the Sarawilt hills, where the climate is equable-indeed it has been related to me that a man in San^ʾ cooked a pot of meat, after which he departed to go on the Pilgrimage; on his return he found the food altogether unchanged. The clothing used here for the winter and for the summer is the same. The nights in Makka in summer are agreeable, but oppressive in Tihilma. In ʿUmiln there falls during the night a type of date honey, while in the Haram the heat is severe, a killing wind blows, the number of flies beyond reckoning. Fruit is scarce in this region except in the Sarawilt hills. There is not a date palm in al-Yaman, waters are not abundant, and the shores are sterile, devoid altogether of water, except for Ghalilfiqa. People have inhabited those towns solely because of the sea. There is not in the entire region a lake, nor is there a river navigable for ships.
Jurisprudents are few here, as are preachers and readers, and Jews are more numerous than Christians. Apart from these there are no other tributary subjects. I did not encounter a single case of elephantiasis there.
Abu al-Fadhl bin Nahilma of Shirilz has informed me of the following tradition. He asserted he had it from Abo SaʿJd Khalaf bin al-Fadh!, who had it from Abu al-Hasan Muhammad bin Hamdiln, who had it from ʿAmr bin ʿAli bin Yahyil bin Kathlr, who had it from ʿAmir bin Ibrilhlm al-Isbahilnl, who had it from Khattilb bin Jaʿfar, who had it from his father, who had it on the authority of SaʿJd bin Jubayr, who had it on the authority of Ibn ʿAbbils. He explains that the utterance, “the winter and summer journey," (Quran, sora 106, v. 2), refers to the people spending the winter in Makka and the summer in al-Tilʾif. Moreover, by the saying, “and has given them security from fear," (ibid, v. 4) the fear of elephantiasis is meant. White leprosy occurs there; and there are many p. 96 Blacks. The majority of the people are tan in colour, generally slight and lean of figure. Their clothing is made chiefly of cotton, and they go shod. They do not use raincloaks, experiencing neither snow nor freezing. No fruits have they in winter, nor any jerked meat, except what has been dried of the sacrificial meat at Minil.
Religious Sects. In Makka, Tihilma, Sanʿaʾ and Qurh they are Sunni; the rural population around SanCiJ.ʾ and its adjacent districts, as also the country people of
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
82
ʿUman, are fanatical heretics, the remainder of al-Hijaz are Ahl al-Ray [people of subjective judgment, followers of Abo Hanlfa]. In ʿUman, Hajar and Saʿda, the people are Shiʿa; the Shīʿa of ʿUman, Saʿda and the people of the Sarawat hills and of the coasts of al-Haramayn, are Muʿtazilites, even those of ʿUman. Predominant in Sanʿaʾ and Saʿda are the followers of Abo Hanlfa, the mosques being in their hands. In al-Maʿafir the teaching of Ibn al-Mundhir is followed, and in the districts of Najd al-Yaman that of Sufyan. The adhiin [the summons to public prayers] in Tihama and in Makka is repeated [in a low voice, then in a raised voice], and if you pay attention to it for a moment you realize it is done in accord with the school of Malik. In Zabld, the takbir is said on the days of the two festivals, according to the teaching of Ibn Mfsʿod; this practice was instituted by al-Qadhl Abo ʿAbd Allah al-Saʿwanl, during my stay there. The practice in al-Hajar is according to the tenets of the Qaramita. In ʿUman are some Dawodiyya, where they have an academy.
The language of the people of this region is Arabic, except in Suhar, where they call out to one another and speak in Persian. The majority of the people ofʿAdan and Judda are Persian, yet their language is Arabic. On the borders ofal-Himyari is a tribe of Arabs whose dialect is incomprehensible. The people of ʿAdan say for “rijlayhi," “rijlaynah" (his two feet); for “yadayhi" they say “yadaynah" (his two hands), and so forth. For the sound of the letter “jim" they pronounce the “kaf', thus for “rajah" (the month Rajab) they say “rakab", and for “rajul" (a man) they say “rakul."
In fact it is related concerning the Prophet-God's peace and blessings be upon him-that a piece of dung was brought him in connection with a ceremony of purification, and this he threw from him saying, “it is ‘riks'" [instead of “rijs" (filth)]. This has left the jurisprudents in a quandary. It may well be that their interpretation of it is admissible; of course it may be, too, that he was employing p. 97 this dialect. All the dialects spoken by the Arabs are found in the deserts of this peninsula; however, the purest is the dialect of Hudhayl, then that of the two Najds, then that spoken in the rest of al-Hijaz. Al-Ahqaf is an exception-their speech is uncouth.
Systems of Reading. In Makka they employ the system of Ibn Kathir, in al-Yaman, the reading of ʿĀsim; however, the reading of Abo ʿAmr is used throughout the rest of the region. I have heard a preeminent reader in Makka say: “We have neither ourselves witnessed nor have we heard that any Imam led the prayer from behind this maqiim, using other than the system of Ibn Kathlr, except at the present day."
Commerce in this region is truly profitable, for here are the two ports of the world, as well as the market of Mina, and here is the sea that reaches to China. Here, too, are Judda and al-Jar, the two granaries of Egypt; Wadi '1-Qura, the
83
THE PENINSULA OF THE ARABS
entrepot of al-Sham and al-ʿIrāq; al-Yaman that produces scarves, carnelians, pelts, slaves. To CUman are exported pharmaceutical goods, perfumery of all kinds even including musk; also saffron, brazilwood, teakwood, sasam (a wood), ivory, pearls, silk brocade, onyx, sapphire, ebony, coconuts, camphor, sandarax resin, aloe, iron, lead, bamboos, clay for chinaware, sandalwood, glass, pepper, and other commodities.
ʿAdan receives ambergris, shuriib (fine linens), shields, Abyssinian slaves, eunuchs, tiger skins, and indeed so much more that were I to enumerate all in detail the book would be unnecessarily prolonged. In connection with the goods of China they have coined proverbial expressions, such as their saying, “they came to you to trade with you or to rule you."
Once, as I had embarked on the sea of al-Yaman, it so happened that I encountered Abo ʿAli al-Hafidh al-Marwazi on board ship. When we had become well acquainted with each other he said to me, “In truth you have made me concerned about you." Said I, “In what way?" Said he, “I see in you a man who walks in the path of goodness. You love virtue and those who practice it, and you aspire after the acquisition of knowledge. You are now bound for a country
that has beguiled many people, and diverted them from the way of piety and
contentment. And I am afraid that when you will have entered ʿAdan, and heard
of one man departing with a thousand dirhams, and returning with a thousand dinars; of another coming with a hundred, and returning with five hundred; of
yet another going out with frankincense and returning with a like quantity of camphor-that you will become inclined to emulate them." Said I, “I pray God that He preserve me!" However, when I did enter it, and heard even more than what he had told me, by heavens I hungered after the same thing as the others,
and prepared to go to the lands of the Zanj (Negroes). So I brought whatever it was necessary for me to buy, and put it in the hands of shipping agents. But God--exalted be His name--caused my interest in the venture to cool, with the death of my partner. I had made a contract with him, but my spirit was shattered at the remembrance of death, and what comes after that. And you may as well realize-may you be guided aright-that for every gain we have mentioned there is a hazard; profits are always attended with dangers; so the wise man must not be deluded in this respect. And indeed he should be aware that God, may He be exalted, will give His servant, for two prostrations in prayer, offered sincerely to Him, more than the world lock, stock and barrel. And indeed, what boots prosperity, with death in its wake, and the accumulation of wealth which one
inescapably must leave behind?
p. 98
Among the specialties of the districts of this region are: the leather of Zabid, and its indigo, incomparable because it is azure, the shuriib (fine linens) ofʿAdan preferred over the soft linens of Egypt, the fibers of al-Mahjara called /if(bast), the buriid (striped cloths) of Suhola and Jurayb, the leather mats and water bottles of Saʿda, the superb cloth of San<aʾ known as sal, and its carnelian; the
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
84
carboys ofʿAthr, the drinking cups ofHaly, whetstones ofYanbuʿ, and its henna; the ben tree of Yathrib with its clusters of sayhani dates; the excellent burdi dates of al-Marwa and its bdellium trees; the frankincense of Mahra and its fish, the wars (yellow dye) of ʿAdan, and the dried peaches of Qurh; the senna ofMakka, the aloes of Usqntra, and the superb masin dates of ʿUmiln.
The measures of this region are: the sa<, the mudd, and the makkūk; the mudd is a fourth of the saʿ, the saʿ a third of the makkuk—this is in al-Hijilz, but there are varying capacities in this [the saʿ]. The standard generally used has a weight of five and one third ratls. I have heard the jurisprudent Abo ʿAbd Allilh at Damascus say that when Abo Yosuf went on the Pilgrimage, and had visited al-Madlna, he revoked two matters in favor of their practice, the first, the admissibility of the adhan before daybreak, the second, the calculation of the saʿ. For the saʿ that ʿUmar assessed in the presence of the Companions, and which p. 99 he used in expiating his vows was the equivalent ofeight ratls; however, SaʿJd bin al-ʿAsl restored it to five and one third, witness the quotation of the versifier:
So to us, to famish us, came Saʿid, diminishing the sāʿ not enlarging it.
On board ship they employ two saʿs, by one of which they measure the rations of the crew; they transact business using the larger one.
Their weights. In Makka the standard is the mann which is well-known in all the countries of Islilm; however, they call it a ratl. The ratl of Yathrib as far as Qurh is two hundred dirhams; the ratl of al-Yaman is the same as that of Baghdad. In ʿUmiln the mann is the standard, in the rest of the region the standard is that of Baghdad. In use, also, is the buhar, an equivalent of three hundred ratls.
There is variation in their coinages: the people of Makka have the mutawwaqa which, like the <Athariyya are each two thirds of a mithqal [a gold coin equaling in weight one and one-third of the dirham, a silver coin]; they are counted out by number like the dirhams of al-Yaman. They are higher than the <Athariyya, and in fact there may between the two be a difference of something just under a dirham. The dinar [a gold coin, the basic monetary unit in Islamic territory] of ʿAdan is of a value of seven dirhams, which is two thirds of the baghawi: they are weighed, not counted. The dinar of ʿUmiln is of thirty dirhams, but it is weighed. The dirhams current in the region are called in Makka al-Muhammadiyya; the natives of Makka also have the muzabbaq, twenty-four to a mutawwaq, or a double akhtami. These are withdrawn from currency from the sixth day of Dhu al-Hijja until the end ofthe season [ofPilgrimage]. The people ofal-Yaman have the coinage called <Alawiyya which varies in value in different places, though it may not be current in some places there at all. Its worth is four of them to a
85
THE PENINSULA OF THE ARABS
dirham, its weight about that ofthe danaq [the sixth part ofa dirham]. They also have the qurūdh, which sometimes goes up in value so that three may equal a danaq; at other times it would be four. Among the natives of ʿUman the tasūh [one twenty-fourth part of a dirham] circulates.
It is the mode in this region to dress in the wizr (small tunic), and the izar (wraparound apron) without shirt, except for a small minority. In Mukha they deride anyone who wears drawers, for it may be only the izar, a single garment, in which one wraps oneself.
In Ramadhan they read the entire Qu’ran in prayer; they then invoke God's blessing and perform prostrations. I led the congregation in the tarawih [the prayers recited at night during the month of Ramadhan] at ʿAdan on one occasion, and I invoked the blessing after the salam; this surprised them greatly. Thereafter Ibn Hazim and Ibn Jabir bade me attend their mosques so I would do the same thing there.
They usually light their lamps with a sayfa, which is fish oil, imported from Mahra. Their lime is black, like black pitch.
In al-Yaman they paste papers together and line the inside covers of their books with starch. On an occasion the amir ofʿAdan sent me a copy ofthe fhtran to bind, so I asked for the glue from the druggists, but they did not know what that was. They referred me, however, to the muhtasib [inspector of markets, and weights and measures], suggesting him as one who might know of it. When I enquired of him about it, said he, “Where are you from?" Said I, “From Palestine." Said he, “You are from the country of abundance. If they had glue here they would eat it! Use the starch!" They admire fine binding, and will offer a handsome price for it. At times I was given two dinars for binding one copy of the Quran.
At ʿAdan they decorate the roofs of the houses two days before Ramadhan, and they beat drums on them. When Ramadhan begins, a group gathers and goes about at early dawn, reciting poems until the night is over. As the festival nears they levy a sum of money from the people. On Nayrnz (New Year's day) they construct canopies which they carry, with their drums, around to the people who are exchanging greetings on the festival. This way they collect a considerable sum of money.
In Makka pavilions are erected on the eve of the breaking of the Fast, and they decorate the market between al-Safl and al-Marwa; then they beat the drums until morning. When the morning prayer is over, the young girls, festively dressed and with fans in their hands, circumambulate the House. They appoint five Imams to lead the tarawih prayers. As they say each tarwiha they go around the Kaʿba seven times; at the same time the muezzins proclaim Allahū akbar (God is most great), and exclaim La ilaha ill-allah (there is no god but God). Then they crack the thongs, as is done at prayer, whereupon the next
p. 100
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
86
Imam advances. They say the night prayer when one-third of the night has passed, and finish with one third yet remaining. Then the time of the sahūr [last meal before daybreak] is announced from Abo. Qubays. No more attractive raiment is to be seen than that of the people of Makka as they go out for the Pilgrimage, for every single one of them in this respect is as well-dressed as an Iraqi!
The waters of this region vary in quality. The water at ʿAdan, the canal in Makka, and the water of Zabld and Yathrib are potable; the water at Ghalafiqa is deadly. The water of Qurh and Yanbuʿ is unhealthy. Water elsewhere in the region is acceptable. I went on the Pilgrimage in the year 356/966 and I found the water of Zamzam distasteful; when I went back in the year 367/978 I found it quite agreeable. Most of the water on the coasts is somewhat brackish, but acceptable. Should someone say, “Whence do you derive this ‘acceptability,' and ‘distastefulness' of water?", I should reply that there are four considerations. First, all water that cools quickly is wholesome, and I have not seen water quicker to cool than that ofTaymaʾ and Arlha. These two are the most wholesome waters in the realm of al-Islam, and it was from here I derived this consideration, which I have since verified through abundant experience. Second, acceptable water is slow to be discharged from the body, while one who drinks unacceptable water has to urinate quickly. Third, good water whets the appetite for food, and promotes digestion. Fourth, should you want to assess the water of a place, visit their clothmakers and druggists, and scrutinize their faces. If you see water in them, you may know that the excellence of the water is in proportion to the freshness of countenance; if they appear to you like the faces of the dead, and you see their heads are drooping, make a hasty retreat from there!
Noxious products: At Makka is a type of eggplant that causes illness. In al-Madlna are leeks from the effect of which the guinea-worm is generated. Mines: Pearls are found in this region on the coasts ofHajar. They are obtained by diving into the sea for them opposite Uwal and the island of Kharak. It was from there that the “incomparable darra" (pearl) was fished out. Men hired for the purpose dive and bring out the seashell, the pearl within it. The greatest hazard for them is a large fish that darts at their eyes; but the profit from this activity is very evident. One who seeks carnelian buys a piece ofland at a place near Sanʿāʾ, where he digs for it. He may find a piece as large as a rock or smaller, sometimes he finds nothing. Between Yanbuʿ and al-Marwa are mines of gold. Ambergris is tossed on to the seashore from ʿAdan to Mukha, and in the direction ofZaylaʿ also. Anyone who finds any of it, little or much, takes it to the deputy of the governor, who pays him for it, giving him in return a piece of canvas and a dinar. The ambergris is not found except when the south wind blows; incidentally, I have never found out what ambergris actually is. Dragon's blood is found opposite al-Juhfa.
p. 101
p. 102
87
THE PENINSULA OF THE ARABS
Sectarian factionalism arises at Makka between the tailors, who are Shi^, and the butchers, who are Sunna-factionalism and fighting. Enmity and brawls arise at ʿAdan between the Jamajimiyyīn and the sailors, as also between the Sunna and the Shiʿa in Yanbuʿ. Among the Baja, the Abyssinians, and the Nubians at Zabid, a strange state of affairs exists; also between the butchers and the Bedouin at al-Yamama. In fact, it is said that they divided the mosque between themselves, and would say to the stranger, “Belong to either side of us as you will, or else get out!"
Places of Veneration: At Makka, Mawlid al-Nabi, [the birthplace of the Prophet-God’s peace and blessings be upon him] in the quarter of the Mahamiliyyīn, [where the camel litters are made]; the House of the Forty in the cloth merchants' quarter; the House of Khadija behind the druggists' quarter; Ghar (Cave of) Thawr one farsakh below Makka; and (Mount) Hiraʾ towards Mina. There is another cave behind the hill of Abo Qubays. The Hill of Quʿayqi<an, opposite Abo Qubays, and in al-Haram, the sacred precinct. The grave of Maymūna on the road to Judda. In al-Thaniyya the graves ofal-Fudhayl, of Sufyan bin ʿUyayna, and Wuhayb bin al-Ward. Between the two Masjids [Makka and al-Madlna] is a number ofholy places associated with the names ofthe Prophet and ʿAll. Masjid al-Shajara (the Mosque of the Tree) at Dhu al-Hulayfa; there is also a tree at Quba, where is also Hajar Fatima. The grave ofHnd-peaea be on him-at al-Ahqaf, on the coast. The place whence fire issues at ʿAdan is a mountain in the sea; and behind the town is the mosque of Aban. The mikhliif of p. 103 Mu<adh is behind Mukha. Too, the mosque ofthe Abandoned Well and the Lofty Palace (Quriin, sūra 22, v. 45) in the mikhliifof al-Bawn. In the mikhlafMarmal, one of the provinces of San<aʾ, came forth the fire which burned the garden of the oath-mongers (Quran, sora 68, v. 20). The well ofʿUthma on the road to Syria. Near al-ʿArj is a hill through which, it is said, Gabriel split open for the Prophet-God's peace and blessings be upon himten the occasion of his emigration, a way to al-Madīna. There fell down a fire between al-Marwa and al-Hawraʾ, and it burned as bums the coal. The houses of al-Farihin (Quran, sora 26, v. 148) in al-Hijr are remarkable for their doors, arched, and decorated in arabesques. Al-Taghiya, a town in ruins. Behind Khaym Umm Maʿbad in the Sarawat hills are remarkable strongholds. Kamaran, an island in the sea, has in it a town with fresh water; it is called al-ʿAql, and here are the prisons of the ruler of al-Yaman. Among the characteristics of the people of Makka is arrogance; the people of al-Yaman lack elegance. The people of ʿUman give short measure, cheat, and fornicate. Adultery in ʿAdan is overt. The people of al-Ahqaf are fanatics, not speaking good Arabic. Al-Hijaz is a country, poor and barren.
The Tribes: As one goes from the Sarawat hills in the direction of Syria, one is in the territory ofal-Agharr bin Haytham; thence one departs to the dwellings of
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
88
Yaʿʿa bin Abl Yaʿʿā; thence to Surdud; thence to the dwellings of ʿAnz Waʾil in the territory of Bani Ghaziyya; aftCT that one is in the habitations of Jurash, al-ʿAtl, and Julajil. From there one goes to the territories ofal-Shuqra where live the Khatʿam; he then reaches the territory of the Harith, where the chief town is called Dhanob, the name of its coast al-Shara; thence to the territory of Shakir and ʿAmir; thence to Bajila; thence to Fahm; thence to among the Bani ʿAsim; thence to ʿAdwan; thence to the Bani Salnl; thence to Mutar, where is a quarry providing stone from which cooking pots are made; thence to the territory of Birma in which are situated al-Abraqa and Hisn al-Mahya. Thereupon, you are at al-Falaj .
Jurisdiction over this region is divided. Al-Hijaz has always been under the control of the rulers of Egypt, because it is the source of its supplies. Al-Yaman is under the Al (Family of) Ziyad dynasty, whose roots are from Hamdan. Ibn Taraf controls ʿAthr, and over Sanʿaʾ is a ruler; however Ibn Ziyad pays him money so that he delivers the khutba [sermon at the midday prayers in the mosque on Fridays] in his name. Sometimes ʿAdan is seized from their hands. The Al Qahtan are in the mountains, they are the oldest dynasty of al-Yaman. The ʿAlawiyya are over Saʿda, and read the khutba in the name of Al Ziyad-thty are the most just ofpeople. CUman belongs to al-Daylam, and Hajar to the Qaramita. Over al-Ahqaf is a native ruler.
Taxes and tolls: At Judda is exacted on every load of wheat half a dinar, and a kay/ (gallon) on each half of a camel load; on a bundle of Shatawi fine linen cloth, three dinars, on a bundle of Dabīqū cloth, two dinars; on a bale of wool two dinars. At ʿAthr on every load one dinar, and on every basket of saffron, one dinar, similarly per head on slaves: this is taken from those leaving the town, and the same levy is imposed at al-Sirrayn on anyone passing through, also at Kamaran. At ʿAdan, merchandise is appraised in terms of Zakawī dinars, then one tenth of the value is exacted in ʿAtharl dinars. It is estimated that one third of the wealth of the merchants reaches the treasury of the ruler, for here the inspection is strict. The levies at places on the coast are light, except at Ghalafiqa. Tolls are levied by land: on the caravans going between Judda and Makka, at al-Qarln, and Batn Marr-at each place half of a dinar. At the gate of Zabid one dinar on a load of musk, half a dinar on a bale of linen. At the other tollbooths, payment is made in ʿAlawī dirhams. The ruler ofSaʿda does not levy a tax on anybody, except that he takes the quarter of the tithe from the merchants.
The Peninsula is tithed. In CUman a dirham is levied on every date palm tree. I have found it in the work of Ibn Khurradadhbih that the revenue of al-Yaman is six hundred thousand dinars; I do not know what he means by this, because I did not see it in Kitab al-Kharaj (The Book ofTribute). In fact, rather, it is well-known that the Peninsula of the Arabs is on a tithing system. The province of al-Yaman formerly was divided into three departments, a governor over al-Janad and its
p. 104
p. 105
89
THE PENINSULA OF THE ARABS
districts, another over Sancaʾ and its districts, and a third over Hadhramawt and its districts. Qudiima bin Jaʿfar al-Katib has noted that the revenue ofal-Haramayn [the two Sacred Cities] is one hundred thousand dinars, of al-Yaman six hundred thousand dinars, ofal-Yamama and al-Bahrayn five hundred ten thousand dinars, and of ʿUman three hundred thousand dinars.
The inhabitants of this region are people of contentment, and slender of figure. They are nourished on plain food, and make do with scant attire. God, may He be exalted, has bestowed on them the best of fruits, and the mistress of trees, dates and the palm.
The following tradition was related to me by Abo ʿAbd Allilh Muhammad bin Ahmad in the city of Arrajan. He said he had had it from al-Qadhl al-Hasan bin ʿAbd al-Rahmiln bin Khalllld, who had it from Mnsll bin al-Husayn, who had it from Shaybiln bin Farrnkh, who had it from Masrnr bin Sufyan al-Tamlml, from al-AwzilʿI, from ʿUrwa bin Ruwaym, from ʿAll bin Abl TalihGod be pleased with him. He said that the Messenger of God-God's peace and blessings be upon him-said on one occasion: “Honour your father's sister, the palm tree, for it was created of the clay of which Adam was created. Of the trees none are pollinated other than it. Feed your women, at the time of their bringing forth, the sweetened ripe date; if there are no sweetened ripe dates, give them those freshly dried."	'
With regard to distances, let it be observed that the word maw (and) is connective, that the word thumma (then-thence) refers to places in their order; and the word aw (or) indicates an alternative. For example, when we say to “such and such a place and such and such a place," then these two places are in the one locality, such as, Khulays and Amaj, Mazlniln and Bahman Abildh. When we say thumma we mean it to be taken in conjunction with what precedes it, as when we say “to Batn Marr, then to ʿUsfhn," “to Ghazza then to Rath." If we say aw (or), then we go back to the word before this last one, as when we say, from al-Ramla to Iliya or to ʿAsqalm, from ShlrllZ to Juwaym or to Silhah. We have reckoned the marhala (stage) at six farsakhs or seven; should it exceed this we place two dots over the letter hiP [in the word for “stage"]; should it exceed ten farsakhs we point it with two dots under the letter lam [in the word for “stage"]; if it is less than six farsakhs, we put one dot over the letter >ha>.
You travel from Makka to Batn Marr, one stage; thence to ʿUsfiln one stage; thence to Khulays and Amaj one stage; thence to al-Khaym one stage; thence to al-Juhfa one stage; thence to al-Abw11ʾ one stage; thence to Suqyil Bani Ghifllr one stage;
p. 106
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
90
thence to al-ʿArj one stage; thence to al-Rawhilʾ one stage; thence to Ruwaytha one stage; thence to Yathrib one stage.
You travel from Makka to Yalamlam, one stage; thence to Qarn, one stage; thence to al-Sirrayn, one stage.
You travel from Makka to Bustiln Bani ʿĀmir, one stage thence to Dhilt ʿlrq, one stage; thence to al-Ghamra, one stage.
You travel from Makka to Qarln, one stage; thence to Judda, one stage. p. 107 From Batn Marr to Judda it is one stage.
You travel from al-Juhfa to Badr, one stage; thence to al-Safrilʾ and al-Maʿilt, one stage; thence to al-Rawhāʾ, one stage.
You travel from Badr to Yanbuʿ, two stages; thence to Raʾs al-ʿAyn, one stage; thence to al-Maʿdin (the mine), one stage; thence to al-Marwa, two stages.
You travel from Badr to al-Jilr, one stage;
thence to al-Juhfa or Yanbuʿ, two stages either way.
You travel from Judda to al-Jilr or al-Sirrayn, four stages, either way.
You travel from Yathrib to al-Suwaydiyya or to Batn al-Nakhl, two stages,
either way;
from al-Suwaydiyya to al-Marwa, the same number of stages; and from Batn al-Nakhl to Maʿdin al-Naqira likewise.
If you wish to take the high road to Egypt, travel from al-Marwa to al-Suqyil; thence to Badil Yaʿqiib, three stages; thence to al-ʿAwnld, one stage.
If you wish to go to Syria travel from al-Suqyil (Yazid) to Wiidl 'l-Quril, one stage; thence to al-Hijr, one stage; thence to Taymilʾ, three stages.
91
THE PENINSULA OF THE ARABS
Ifyou wish to travel to Makka by the Kūfa road, take it from Zubala, which is inhabited and has abundance of water, to al-Shuqoq, twenty-one miles; thence to al-Bitan, twenty-nine miles; thence to al-Thaʿʿabiyya, twenty-nine miles; this place marks one-third of the way. It is inhabited, has a large number oftanks p. 108 and some wells of brackish but drinkable water.
Thence to al-Khuzaymiyya, thirty-two miles; thence to Ajfur, twenty-four miles; thence to Fayd, thirty-six miles:
this is a flourishing town with two forts and abundance of water.
Thence to Tawwaz, which is halfway, thirty-one miles; thence to Samīraʾ, twenty miles.
It has many tanks, an abundant supply of water and cultivated fields; the water is brackish but drinkable;
thence to Hajir, thirty-three miles; thence to Maʿdin al-Naqira, thirty-four miles.
It has a fort; the water supply is poor and the place desolate.
Thence to al-Mughītha, thirty-three miles;
thence to al-Rabadha, twenty-four miles: the water is bitter and the place in ruths.
Thence to Maʿdin Bani Sulaym, twenty-four miles; thence to al-Salīla, twenty-six miles;
thence to al-ʿUmaq, twenty-one miles. Al-ʿUmaq has remarkable wells, but the water is not abundant.
Thence to al-Ufayʿiya, thirty-two miles;
thence to al-Mislah, thirty-four miles: here are tanks, and water is abundant. Thence to Ghamra, eighteen miles: water is abundant here. p. 109 If you wish to get to it (Makka) from al-Basra, go from al-Basra to al-Hufayr, eighteen miles;
thence to al-Ruhayl, twenty-eight miles; thence to al-Shajī, twenty-seven miles; thence to Hafr Abī Mosa, twenty-six; thence to Mawiyya, thirty-two; thence to Dhat al-ʿUshar, twenty-nine; thence to al-Yansū<a١ twenty-three; thence to al-Sumayna, twenty-nine؛ thence to al-Qaryatayn, twenty-two; thence to al-Nibaj, twenty-three;
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
92
thence to al-ʿAwsaja, twenty-nine;
thence to to Rama ...;
thence to Immara, twenty-seven;
thence to Tikhfa, twenty-six;
thence to Dhariyya, eighteen;
thence to Jadīla, thirty-two;
thence to Mulha, thirty-five;
thence to al-Dathīna, twenty-six;
thence to Quba, twenty-seven;
thence to al-Shubayka (Sunbula), twenty-seven;
thence to Wajra, forty;
thence to Dhat Irq, twenty-seven.
The whole distance is seven hundred miles.
Now as for the road of the West: you travel from Wayla to Sharaf Dhi al-Naml,
one stage;
thence to Madyan, one stage;
thence to al-Aʿri'l', one stage;
thence to a halting-place, one stage;
thence to al-Kulaya (al-Kilaba), one stage;
thence to Shaghb, one stage;
thence to Badi'l, one stage;
thence to al-Sarhatayn;
thence to al-Baydhaʾ;
thence to Wi'l.dī '1-Qura.
The route now in use is as follows: from Sharaf Dhi al-Naml to al-Sali'l.; thence to al-Nabk; thence to Dhabba; thence to al-ʿAwnid; thence to al-Ruhba; thence to Munkhūs; thence to al-Buhayra; thence to al-Ahsi'l.ʾ; thence to al-ʿUshayra; thence to al-Ji'l.r; thence to Badr.
If you desire to go there (Makka) from ʿUmān, go from Suhar to Nazwa; thence to ʿAjla, thirty miles;
thence to ʿAdhwa, which is a fortress, twenty-four miles; thence to Biʾr al-Silah, thirty miles; thence to Makka, twenty-one days;
p. 110
p. 111
93
THE PENINSULA OF THE ARABS
on this route four stations have wells, while eight stages pass through a desert of sand.
If you travel to it from Hajar, go from al-Ahsaʾ to [lacuna in MS].
Ifone wishes to start from Sanʿaʾ one travels first to al- Rayda, one stage; thence to Athafit; thence to Khaywan; thence to al-Aʿmashiyya; thence to Saʿda; thence to Gharfa; thence to al-Mahjara; thence to SharOrah; thence to al-Thujja; thence to Kuthba;
thence to Yabanbam, which is at a distance of eight miles from Jurash;
thence to Banat Jarm, one stage;
thence to Jasadaʾ;
thence to Bisha;
thence to Tabala;
thence to Ranya;
thence to Kudayy;
thence to Safr;
thence to Turaba;
thence to al-Futuq;
thence to al-Judad;
thence to al-Ghamra.
The direct route is by way of al-Taʾʾf, although I have not traveled on this route. From Makka to al-Taʾif there are two routes. You go to Biʾr Ibn al-Murtafiʿ, one stage;
thence to Qarn, one stage; thence to al-Taʾif, one stage.
The other route is by way of ʿArafat, two stages over the hill.
For one who wishes to go there (Makka) starting from Wayla, and this is the route of all pilgrims from the west, there is a number of ways. The route along the coast you take from Wayla to Sharaf al-Baʿl١ one stage; thence to al-Sala, one stage; thence to al-Nabk, one stage; thence to Dhabba, one stage; thence to ʿAwnīd, one stage;
p. 112
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
94
thence to al-Ruhba, one stage;
thence to Munkhūs, one stage;
thence to al-Buhayra, one stage;
thence to al-Ashaʾ, one stage [lacuna in MS]
thence to al-Aʿraʾ, one stage;
thence to al-Kilaba, one stage;
thence to Shaghb, one stage;
thence to Bada, one stage;
thence to al-Sarhatayn, one stage;
thence to al-Baydhaʾ, one stage;
thence to Qurh, one stage;
thence to Suqya Yazld, one stage.
As for the system in al-Yaman, I am not about to render a precise computation of the stages of the routes here as in the case of other districts; I will, however, state what I have known, and summarize what I have heard.
From Sancaʾ to Sudaʾ, forty-twofarsakhs.
From Sancaʾ to Hadhramawt, seventy-fourfarsakhs.
From Sancaʾ to Dhamar, sixteenfarsakhs; thence to Nasafan and Kahlan, one stage; thence to Hujr and Badr, twenty farsakhs; thence to ʿAdan, twenty-fourfarsakhs.
From Dhamar to Yahsib, one stage; [Map V] thence to al-Suhūl, one stage; thence to al-Thujja, the same distance; thence to al-Janad, the same.
From Sancaʾ to al-Janad, forty-eightfarsakhs.
From Sancaʾ to al-ʿUrf١ one stage; thence to Alhan, tenfarsakhs; thence to Jublan, fourteen; thence to Zabld, twelve.
From Sancaʾ to Shibam, one stage.
From Sancaʾ to ʿAthr, ten stages.
From ʿAdan to Abyan, threefarsakhs.
p. m
The Region ofAl-Iraq
This is the region of men of refinement, the fountainhead of scholars. The water is delightful, the air marvelous; it is the chosen place of the khalifs. It produced Abo Hanlfa, the jurist of jurisprudents; and Sufyan, the best of the Quranic Readers. From here came Abo ʿUbayda, and al-Farraʾ; and Abo ʿAmr, author of a system of Quranic reading. It is the birthplace of Hamza, and al-Kisaʾī: of virtually every jurist, Reader, and litterateur; of notables, sages, thinkers, ascetics, distinguished people; of charming and quick-witted people. Here is the birthplace of Abraham, the Companion of God, thither journeyed many noble Companions of the Prophet. Is not al-Basra there, which can be compared to the entire world? and Baghdad, praised by all mankind? sublime al-Kofa and Samarra? Its river most certainly is of Paradise; and the dates of al-Basra cannot be forgotten. Its excellences are many and beyond count. The Sea of China touches its furthermost extremity, and the desert stretches along the edge of it, as you see. The Euphrates debouches within its limits.
Yet it is the home of dissension and high prices, and every day it retrogresses; from injustice and taxes there is trouble, and distress. Its fruits are few, its vices many, and the oppression on the people is heavy.
This is the map and representation of it, but God is more knowing, and wiser. [Map V]
We have made al-ʿIrāq six districts and a section. The districts in olden times were different from these, except for Hulwan; but we always treat the matter according to what is now generally accepted. We have included the old districts and capitals in the military districts, the districts bearing the same name as the capitals.
D
p. 114
The first of these, starting from the Peninsula of the Arabs, is al-Kofa, next al-Basra; then Wasit, Baghdad; Hulwan, then Samarra.
Al-Kofa-among its towns are: Hammam Ibn ʿUmar; al-Jamiʿayn; Sora; al-Nil; al-Qadisiyya; ʿAyn al-Tamr.
Al-Basra-amono its towns are: al-Ubulla; Shiqq ʿUthman; Zaban; Badran; Bayan; Nahr al-Malik; Dubba; Nahr al-Amlr; Abu al-Khaslb; Sulaymanan; ʿAbbadan; al-Muttawwiʿa; al-Qndal; al-Maftah; al-Jaʿfariyya.
Wasit-among its towns are: Fam al-Silh; Darmakan; Quraquba; Siyada; Badhibln; al-Sikr; al-Tlb; Qurqob; Qaryat al-Raml; Nahr Tlra; Lahban; Basamiya; Odisa.
Baghdad-among its towns are: al-Nahrawan; Baradan; Kara; al-Daskara; p. 115 Tarastan; Haroniyya; Jalola; Bajisra; Baquba; Iskaf; Buwahriz; Kalwadha; Darzljan; al-Madaʾin; Kll(Gll); Sib; Dayr al-ʿAqol; al-Nuʿmaniyya; Jarjaraya; Jabbul; Nahr Sabus; ʿAbarta؛ Babil; ʿAbdas; Qasr Ibn Hubayra.
Hulwan-among its towns are: Khaniqln؛ Zabojan؛ Shalashilan؛ al-Jamid؛ al-Hurr; al-Sirawan; Bandanljan.
9 ‘zjjsaqjnqn^ jaqDSissnaj(!ولا؟لاءSunipiqwiauo قل0لاا ٠sw 09 ipjBAqqvi J9Su3jdgعو ٩^ ٩؟uij3d pu؟ss؟iqiqsiBBis aqijo U0؟3RI0 dtrw ٨: Jtīv؟I ■d 33S) b)
97
THE REGION OF AL-JRAQ
Samarra-among its towns are: al-Karkh; ClJkbara; al-Dūr; al-Jamiʿayn (the two Mosques); Batt; Radhanat; Qasr al-Jass; Harl; Aywana; Barlqa; Sindiyya; Raqafrūba; Dimimma; al-Anbar; Hit; Takrlt; al-Sinn.
Now someone may say: “Why did you consider Babil to be a district town, seeing that the whole region around was named after it in olden times? Did not al-Jayhanl begin his work by mentioning these districts, calling the area by the name ofBabil? Wahb named it similarly in his Mubtada (First Principles), as did other scholars besides him": I reply that we have protected ourselves against this and similar questions in the treatment of our subject, by dealing with the matter according to general usage, and as is the case in the matter of Oaths. Do you not see that if a man should swear that he would not eat heads, and then would eat p. 116 of the heads of oxen or sheep, he would thus break his oath; but Abū Yūsuf and Muhammad [ibn al-Hasan al-Shaybanl] say that he would not thereby break his oath? Now, I have heard our leading doctors say that they do not consider that there is any discrepancy between the two positions. Because, you see, in the time of Abū Hanlfa these heads used to be sold and eaten; but that practice ceased in their time. Now, we have journeyed over the length and breadth of the realm of Islam, and have not heard anyone say other than that this is the region of al-ʿIrāq-in fact, the vast majority of people do not know where Babil is. Moreover, consider the answer of Abo Bakr to ʿUmar, when the latter asked him to send his troops to this area. Said he: “That God may conquer by my hands one span of the Holy Land would be more pleasing to me than one entire district of the districts of al-Iraq." He did not say, “of the districts of Babil." If someone were to adduce the saying of God-may He be exalted-“And what was sent down to the two angels in Babil" (Quriin, sura 2, v. 102), as proof of what we have said, then I would say that it may very well be that this name may include both the region and the town. Now, with regard to the name being applied to the town there is absolute agreement, for no one disputes with another about its name: that the name is applied to the region is controversial. The burden of proof is, then, on the one who so applies it.
Al-Kūfa is a splendid, charming, and beautiful metropolis, with lofty
buildings, very fine markets, and an abundance of supplies: it is a well-populated, prosperous place. Saʿad bin Abl Waqqas founded it in the days of ʿUmar. Any tract where sand is mixed with pebbles is called ‘kūfa': do you not notice the nature of the ground here? The town that was formerly here was al-Hira, but it fell into ruins. The first of the Companions to settle here [in al-Kūfa] was ʿAll bin Abl Talib, under whose authority were ʿAbd Allah bin Masʿūd and Abu al-Darda; the others who followed neglected it.
The mosque is in the eastern quarter, built on tall jointed pillars of stone; p. 117 it is handsome and perfectly constructed. The river flows on that side of the city that is towards Baghdad. The wells are of brackish water, but drinkable, and all around it are palm groves and gardens. Here also are reservoirs and underground conduits. The district called al-Kunasa is toward the desert. The
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
98
town has deteriorated and its suburbs are in ruin: at one time it was as great as Baghdad.
Al-Qadisiyya is a town situated on the edge of the desert, flourishing during the season of the Pilgrimage, when all kinds of good things are carried thither. It has two gates, and a fortress of clay. A canal has been carried from the Euphrates to a reservoir at the Baghdad Gate. There are springs of tolerable water there too, and another watercourse which they cause to flow around to the gate on the desert side, at the season of the Pilgrimage. The town consists of one marketplace, the mosque standing in it.
Sora is a town with an abundance of fruits and grapes; it is populous. The other towns here are small and populous. ʿAyn al-Tamr is a fortified place, its people covetous.
Al-Basra is a distinguished capital; the Muslims founded it in the time ofʿUmar. He wrote to his Commander: “Build for the Muslims a city central to Fars and the country of the Arabs, towards the border of al-ʿIrāq, on the Sea of China." So they agreed on the site of al-Basra, and the Arabs settled there. Do you not see, even today, how it is laid out in quarters? Then ʿUtba \>in Ghazwan made it a metropolis. It is in the shape of a taylasiin. From the Tigris two canals have been led thither-Nahr al-Ubulla and Nahr Maʿqil: after they come together they flow by the city. Several canals branch off from it from the side of ʿAbbadan and al-Madhar. The city stretches lengthwise along the river, and its houses, on the landside, extend to the desert: on this side is one gate, between which and the canal is a distance of about three miles. Three mosques stand in this city. One, a splendid one, is in the markets, an important mosque, well-built and well attended; there is nothing else like it in al-ʿIraq. It is built on white pillars. Another mosque, the oldest of them, is near Bab al-Badiya (the Gate of the Desert); the remaining one is at the edge of the town. The markets are in three sections: Al-Kallaʾ (“a mooring for ships") which is along the canal, the Great Market, and the Bab al-Jamiʿ market. All these markets are quite good. For me, this town is superior to Baghdad, because of the prosperity here and the great number of pious people. Once I was present in an assembly that included
many of the jurisprudents of Baghdad, and its scholars. They were conversing
p. 118 about Baghdad and al-Basra; and they concluded that if the inhabited areas of Baghdad were to be brought together, and the ruined parts removed, it would
be no bigger than al-Basra: although by then the desert side of al-Basra had fallen into ruins. The name of this city is derived from the black stones which the ships of al-Yaman used to use as ballast, and then would throw out here. Some, however, say, not so; that it is derived from a soft whitish rock. And Qutrub says that the name is derived from the rugged ground.
The baths here are excellent. Fish and dates are here aplenty, besides meat, vegetables, grains, dairy products; the sciences and commerce flourish. Yet, good water is scarce, the air is constantly changing and baneful, and the people are amazingly given to riot.
99
THE REGION OF AL-'IRAQ
Al-Ubulla is on the Tigris at the mouth of the canal ofal-Basra, on the north side; the mosque is toward the farther side of it. It is a large and well-populated village, with better services than al-Basra, and more spacious.
Shiqq ʿUthman is exactly opposite to it on the south bank. The mosque, which is very fine, is at the extreme end of the canal. The other towns are on canals on both sides of the Tigris, both to the right and left, and to the south and north. They are all large and important towns.
ʿAbbadan is a town situated on an island lying between the Tigris of al-ʿIrāq and the river of Khūzistan; it is on the coast. There is no town beyond it, no village-nothihg but sea. There are defense posts here, and virtuous and upright people, most of them makers of mats from the reeds. However, fresh water here is scarce, the sea surrounding it entirely.
Addition/version MS. c.
The Prophet-God’s peace and blessings be upon him-said: “Should any one ofyou reach ʿAbbādān, let him take up his position there, for it is clay ofthe clay ofJerusalem which the flood took to there in the time of Noah, and which will return to its original place on the Day of the Resurrection.”
Wasit is a large capital in two sections, with two mosques, and a bridge between them. It is a place of plenty, and abounds in fish. The mosque of al-Hajjaj, and his dome, are towards the west, on the edge of the markets, far from the riverbank. It has fallen into ruin somewhat, but is crowded with reciters of the
Quran. Al-Hajjaj planned the construction of it, and it was named Wasit, because
of its situation between the chief cities of al-ʿIrāq and the city of al-Ahwaz. It is a well-supplied place, the air is healthy, the water sweet. The markets are excellent, with an extensive rural area nearby. At each end ofthe bridge is a place for the passage of ships. The inhabitants are people of refinement.
The other towns of Wasit are small and in poor condition, the more substantial of them being al-Tlb and Qurqūb; the district is prosperous, however.
Al-Sallq is a city on the shore of a lake that measures forty farsakhs in length. Its domain reaches the outskirts of al-Kofa. The heat is intense, the air depressing and the place is filthy. The housebugs are murderous, and life is miserable! With their bread the inhabitants eat fish, their drinking water is hot, their nights are torture. Their intellects are weak, their language is corrupt, and there is but little esprit. Great is their distress! However, it is a source of flour, and government there is mild; and both water and fish are abundant. The town has a great name, and every man there is both steadfast in war, and skilled on the river. They have a beautiful situation, resembling the canal at al-Ubulla. Al-Jamida is closest to it in size: both towns are some distance from the Tigris. The remaining towns are inferior to these two. The wide flats of this area with pools and shallows, known as al-Bataʾih, have cultivated areas, also, and al-ʿIrāq derives considerable provisions from them.
p. 119
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
100
Baghdad is the metropolis of Islam, and within it is Madlnat al-Salam [the
City of Peace]. Its people have distinctive characteristics of wittiness, charm, refinement, and correct scholarship. The climate is mild, and all that is good and beautiful is to be found there. Every skillful person comes from there, and every refinement is found there. Every heart yearns for it; every battle is fought over it, and every hand is raised to defend it. It is too renowned to need description, more glorious than we could possibly portray it, and is indeed beyond praise.
Abu al-ʿAbbas al-Saffah founded it, then al-Mansūr built in it the City of Peace, and the khalifs after him added to it. When he determined to build the City of Peace he inquired about its winter, its summer, the season of rains, the gnats, and the climate. He ordered certain men to live there through all the seasons of the year, so that they should learn all these particulars. He then consulted the judicious from among its inhabitants, who said to him: “We deem it advisable that you settle in the midst of the four districts, on the east Būq and Kalwadha, and on the west Qutrabbul and Badūraya. Thus you will be surrounded by palms and be close to water. If, then, one of the districts should suffer from drought, or its cultivation be delayed, another would relieve the p. 120 situation. Moreover, you are on the banks of al-Sarat, so that supplies can come to you by the vessels plying on the Euphrates; the caravans from Egypt and Syria will come across the desert, goods of all different kinds from China will reach you by sea, and from the Romaeans and al-Mawsil by the Tigris. Again, you are in a place between rivers so that the enemy cannot reach you except by ship, or by bridge, by way of the Tigris or the Euphrates."
Accordingly, he built the city in four sections, the City ofPeace, Badūraya, al-Rusafa, and the quarter where the palace of the khalif stands today. It used to be the most beautiful possession of the Muslims, a most splendid city, far exceeding our description of it.
However, the authority of the khalifs declined, the city deteriorated, and the population dwindled. The City of Peace is now desolate: the Mosque alone is frequented on Fridays, and otherwise the whole place is deserted. The most populous areas there now are Qatiʿat al-Rabiʿ, and al-Karkh on the western side, and on the east Bab al-Taq and the neighbourhood ofthe palace ofthe Amir. The public buildings and the markets for the most part are in the western quarter. The bridge is near Bab al-Taq and close by is a hospital, founded by ʿAdhud al-Dawla. There is in each of the districts we have mentioned a congregational mosque. Day by day the town is going from bad to worse: truly, I fear it will become like Samarra, what with the corruption, the ignorance and immorality, and the outrageous oppression of the ruler.
Abū Bakr al-lsmaʿlll told us, at Jurjan, that he had it from Ibn Najiya, who had it from Ibrahim al-Tarjumanl, who had it from Sayf bin Muhammad, who had it from ʿAsim al-Ahwal, that Abū CUthman al-Nahdl recounted the following: “I was one time in the company ofJarlr bin ʿAbd Allah and he asked those present: ‘By what name is this river called?' And they said, ‘Tigris.' Said
101
THE REGION OF AL-JRAQ
he: ‘And this other stream?' They said, ‘Dujayl' (Little Tigris). ‘And this river?' They said ‘Sarilt'. Said he: ‘And this stand of palms?' They said, ‘Qutrabbul.' Thereupon, he rode his steed hastily away, saying: ‘I once heard the Messenger of God—God's peace and blessings be upon him—say: “A city will be built between the Tigris, Dujayl, Qutrabbul and al-Sarilt, to which will be gathered the treasures of the earth in tribute. And the people in their arrogance will be brought low, and their descent into the earth will be faster than the sinking of an iron spike in soft ground"’."
The canals from the Euphrates flow into the Tigris south of the city; but
to the front of the city and to the north of it only the Tigris flows.		Vessels sail
on these branches of the Euphrates as far as al-Kūfa, on the Tigris as far as		
al-Mawsil.		
Al-Shimshiltl mentions in his History that when al-Mansiir purposed to build the City of Peace he brought together before him the most famous people in legal practice, and jurisprudence, possessed of impartiality and integrity, and a knowledge of engineering. Among these were Abo Hanlfa al-Naʿmiln ibn Thilbit, and al-Hajjilj bin Artilt. He assembled the craftsmen and the workers from Syria, al-Mawsil, al-Jabal, and his other provinces. He ordered the lines of the city to be plotted, and the foundations dug in the year 145/762, and it was finished in the year 149/766. He ordered the thickness of the wall at the base to be fifty cubits, and he provided the city with eight gates, four small inner gates, and four large outer gates. These were the Basra Gate, the Syria Gate, the KhurilSiln Gate, and the Kūfa Gate. He placed the great mosque and the palace in the center of the city. The Qjbla of the great mosque of al-Rusilfa is more correct than that of the mosque here. I learned from a book I found in one of the libraries of the khalifs that al-Mansūr spent in building the City of Peace four million and eight hundred and thirty-three dirhams-, the wages of an ustildh (overseer) was a qirilt, that of a labourer, two habbas (grains).
Al-Nahrawiln is a town situated on both banks of the canal, the eastern side being the more populous, spacious, and well developed. Between the two quarters is a bridge. The mosque is on the eastern side, and on this bank the pilgrims halt to rest on their way.
Al-Daskara is a small town having a single long market, at the lower end of which stands the mosque: the air in the building is sultry and the light deficient. It has a long arched portico.
Jalolil, surrounded by trees, is not well fortified. These towns and Khilniqln are on the main road to Hulwiln; they are of little importance, and are hardly worthy of Baghdild.
Sarsar also is like a village of Palestine; the canal flows beside it; similarly Nahr al-Malik and al-Sarilt are mere villages.
Qasr Ibn Hubayra, on the other hand, is a large town with excellent markets. Water is brought to it from the Euphrates. Weavers and Jews are there in great numbers. The mosque stands beside the marketplace.
D
p.l21
D
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
102
Babil is a small place remote from the road; the high road runs over a bridge nearby. The other towns around here are of the same description, for instance al-Nil, and ʿAbdas, and Kūta.
Kota Rabba is the native town of Abraham, and here are some mounds said to be the ashes of the fire of Nimriid. Close to Kūta al-Tarlq is a structure resembling a tower, and the inhabitants have a tradition about it.
There is not on the Tigris, in the direction of Wasit, a town more splendid than Dayr al-ʿĀqūl. It is large, prosperous, and populous, with its great mosque away from the marketplace. The markets, which are excellent, have branches throughout the city; in fact it very much resembles the towns in Palestine.
Next to this town in size is Jabbul, a thriving and populous place. The mosque, which is graceful, stands beside the marketplace. Next to this is al-Nuʿmaniyya, a small town, with its mosque in the marketplace. Next is Jarjaraya: it used to be a great town, but today it is in disorder, and its buildings are isolated. The mosque, which is close to the river bank, is in splendid condition. A canal flows around part of the town. These towns we have mentioned lie on the western side of the Tigris. The remaining towns are small in size.
In the direction of Samarra lies the town of CUkbara, large and prosperous, abounding in fruits, producing superb grapes: all-in-all, a distinguished town.
As regards al-Madaʾin, it is in the direction of Wasit; it is a populous town, its buildings of baked brick; the mosque is in the marketplace. Towards the east lies Asbanbur, in which is the tomb of Salman, also the Palace of the Kisra.
So these are the towns of Baghdad; at the same time, in Khurasan are many
villages more important than most of these towns.
to be called Surilr man Ra>ā, “the Delight of the Beholder." This name was abridged to Surmara. The city has a large mosque which used to be considered superior to the mosque at Damascus. Its walls had been coated with enamel, pillars ofmarble were erected within it, and it was paved with marble. The mosque has a tall minaret, and all its other features are in keeping with this. Samarra was indeed a considerable town, but is now gone to ruin, so a man may walk for two or three miles and not come upon an inhabited place. The town is on the east bank of the river, while on the west bank are extensive gardens. Al-Muʿtasim also erected there a building resembling the Kaʿbf, and laid out a walk for circumambulation. He also set up places to resemble Mina and ʿArafat, thereby imposing on some Amlrs [Turkish guards] in his service, when they asked permission to go on the Pilgrimage, and he feared they might quit his service. When the town fell into ruin, and into the condition as we have described it, it came to be called Sā>a man raʾā-“he is grieved who sees it". That name was shortened, and became Samarra.
Al-Karkh, a town that adjoins it toward al-Mawsil, is in better condition. I once heard the Qadhi Abu al-Husayn al-Qazwlnl say: “Baghdad has never
p. 122
p. 123
THE REGION OF AL-'IRA.Q	103
produced any jurist whatsoever, except Abū Mūsā al-DharJr." “And," said I, “what about Abu al-Hasan al-Karkhl?" Said he: “He was not from Karkh of Baghdad at all, he was from Karkh near Samarra."
Al-Anbar is a large city, and here al-Mansūr first resided; his palace is there, but the town has become unimportant.
Hit is a large town enclosed by a wall, situated on the Euphrates, and close to the desert.
Takrlt is a large town, producing sesame; woolworkers are there. Here the Christians have a convent to which they make pilgrimage.
(Alth is a large town connected by canal to the Tigris. It has wells of easily accessible fresh water, not deep, but copious. The town is populous, with many persons of distinction.
Al-Sinn is a large town situated on the Tigris; to the east ofit flows the River Zab. Its mosque stands among the markets. The buildings are of stone. The mountains are close by the town, which is on the borders of Aqūr.
The towns of the district of Samarra are more splendid than the towns of the district of Baghdad.
Hulwan is a small capital city, partly on the plains and partly in the hills. It is surrounded by gardens, grape vines, and fig trees, and is situated close to the mountains. It has a long market, and an ancient fortress, and nearby is a small stream. It has a quhandiz [ancient town fortress] within which stands the mosque. Eight roads lead to the town: the road of Khurasan, the road of al-Baqat, the road of al-Musalla (the Oratory), the road of the Jews, the road of Baghdad, the road of Barqlt, the road of the Jewess, and the road of Majakan. The Jews have a temple there which they hold in great reverence; it is outside the town, built of gypsum and stone. However, the city of Bayt al-Maqdis (Jerusalem) is bigger, more splendid, more flourishing, more elegant than this city, besides having more doctors of the law and scholars attached to it. The towns of this district are small, in ruin, and not worth mention.
As for the Tigris, its water may be described as feminine, pleasant and excellent, favorable to jurists; Abū Bakr al-Jassas used to order his water brought to him from a place above the canal of al-Sarat, before the Euphrates reaches it. This river, the Tigris, emerges from Aqūr, and we shall mention its origins when we treat of that area. Then in this region a number of streams join it. In the district of Baghdad four canals from the Euphrates flow down into it -al-Sarat, Nahr ؟sa, Nahr Sarsar, and Nahr al-Malik. Moreover, it receives from the east side, below Baghdad, the waters of the Nahrawanat canals. Then when it passes Wasit the river spreads out, so that its navigation is difficult as far as the environs of al-Basra. Boats are continually sailed up and down stream, and with considerable skill. At Baghdad the people come and go, and cross the river by these vessels: there is constant bustle and stir. Indeed, two-thirds of the charm of Baghdad derives from this river.
p. 124
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
104
	The Euphrates, on the other hand, is a masculine river: it has a hardness	
about it.		Its origin is in the country of the Romaeans and it flows in a curve
around a portion of this region. It arrives at al-Kofa, after forming a number of branches. It then flows down to the west of Wasit. There it sprawls out into an extensive surface of water surrounded by flourishing villages, from which the river does not emerge again. Boats from as far up as al-Raqqa may navigate this river.
One should be aware that al-ʿIrāq is not a land of abundance, but it has become important and populous because of these two rivers, and what is transported on them; and because of the Sea of China, which is adjacent to it. Baghdad is distinguished over all others in the excellence of its climate, the like of which is never seen elsewhere; and in speaking of al-Basra, it is not possible to say too much about its waters, its storage cisterns, and the ebb and flow of the tides there.
Abu al-Hasan Mutahhar bin Muhammad related to me, in Rama-Hurmuz, that he had it from Ahmad bin ʿAmr bin Zakariyyāʾ, who had it from al-Hasan bin ʿAll bin Bahr, who had it from Abū Shuʿayb al-Qaysi, who had it from Ashras, who said: “I once asked Ibn ʿAbbās about the ebb and flow of the tides. He told me: ‘An angel is charged with the responsibility over the great depths of the ocean: when he puts down his foot, the water flows, and when he lifts his foot, it ebbs.'"
The flow and reflow of the tides is a source of constant wonder to the p. 125 people of al-Basra, and a boon besides, as the water visits them twice in every day and night: it enters the canals, waters the gardens, and carries the boats to the villages. The tide is useful also in its ebb, because it works mills situated at the mouths of the canals: as the water goes out, it turns them. The flood tide reaches as far as al-Bataʿih (the swamps). The tides have definite seasons which recur with those of the moon.
A Summary Account of Conditions in this Region The climate of this region is varied. For example, Baghdad and Wasit and the area in between have a gentle climate, but it is quick to change: sometimes in the summer it is white-hot and unbearable here, when suddenly a change sets in.
At al-Kofa conditions are in contrast with this. At al-Basra the heat is oppressive, except when the north wind blows: then the weather becomes pleasant there. In an account of al-Basra I read the following: “Our life in al-Basra is remarkable: when the north wind blows, we are in a planted countryside; however, when the south wind blows, we are in a sewer." Indeed, I have noticed them in a most depressed mood with the south wind blowing, and a man would meet his friend and say, “Do you not see the condition we are in now?" and the other would answer: “We implore God for relief." Sometimes there descends on them at night moisture resembling the thick syrup of ripe dates.
105
THE REGION OF AL-IRAQ
Hulwan, on the other hand, has an equable climate; but as for al-Bataʾih, heaven help us! Anyone who visits this place in summer has some remarkable experiences to endure. In fact, they sleep within curtains, because there is an insect there with a stinging organ like a needle, consisting of the insect's entire forepart.
p. 126 In these cities are many doctors of the law, readers of the Quriin, litterateurs, eminent profusion؛! people, and kingly personages, especially in Baghditd and al-Basra. Preachers here are held in low estimation. Ice is brought hither from afar. The weather is cold in winter: sometimes water freezes at al-Basra, but commonly at Baghdad. The people of al-Koff and al-Basra are tawny of skin.
There are many Magians in this region, and dhimmi, both Christians and Jews. A number of Islamic sects are here, the preponderants in Baghdad being Hanbalites and ShiC:i. The pre-eminence of the jurisprudents of the two ʿIrāqs [the cities of al-Kofa and al-Basra] has been recognized for ages. Also in this region are Mitlikites, AshC:trites, Muʿtazilites, Najjllrites; in al-Kofa the people are ShiC:i, except in the quarter of al-Kunilsa, where they are Sunnl. At al-Basra are institutes and public sessions of the Sitlimites, a group that claims to study theology and practice asceticism: most of the preachers here are from this group. They do not proclaim themselves a school of jurisprudence, those of them who study jurisprudence following the teaching of Millik. They maintain however, that their founder, Ibn Sitlim, learned his law from Abo Hanlfa—Sitlim had been a slave of Sahl bin ʿAbd Allith al-Tustarl. To me they seemed to be an upright group of people, endowed with great grace; however, they are excessive in the laudation of their leader. I frequented their company for a long time, knew their secrets, and won a place in their hearts; for I am a man who loves ascetic people, inclining towards those who practice self-denial, whoever they may be. There is a graciousness in their speech and their writings, their assemblies are uplifting, and contention is far removed from them.
Most of the people of al-Basra are Qadarites and Shiʿa; next in number are the Hanbalites. In Baghdad is a sect of fanatics, who go beyond all bounds in their love of Mu<itwiya; here are also the Mushabbites (anthropomorphists), and the Barbahllrites.
Addition/version MS. c.
The Hanbalites of al-ʿIrāq are fanatic anthropomorphites. They exceed all bounds in their attachment to Mu<awiya; and they relate in this respect some abominable stories, especially the Barbahariyya.
One day I was in the mosque in Witsit, when I saw a man there around whom a crowd of people had gathered. I approached the group and heard him declare: “So and so has related to us that he learned from so and so that the Prophet-God's peace and blessings be upon him-said that God would draw Mu<itwiya close to him on the Day of the Resurrection, and would seat him by
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
106
His side. He would anoint him with His own hands, and display him to mankind as He would a bride." So said I to him: “Why should that be? Is it because he waged war with ʿAli? May God be pleased with Muʿawiya, but you are a liar, you misguided one." At this the man exclaimed: “Seize this unbeliever." The crowd moved towards me, but one of the learned men there recognized me, and restrained them.
The majority of the jurisprudents and the judges of this region are followers . One day I was in the assembly of Abū Muhammad al-Sirafi, and “You are a Syrian, and the people of your region are adherents of Tradition, and follow the law in the interpretation of al-Shafiʿi; so why have you expressed an interpretation in accord with Abū Hanifa?" Said I: “There are three reasons, may God preserve the Faqih!" Said he: “And what are they?" Said I: “First, I have noticed his reliance on the authority ofʿAli, may God be pleased with him. Now the Prophet has said, ‘I am the city of learning, and ʿAli is its gate.' He has also said: ‘The most skilled jurist among you is ʿAli, meaning in the application of the fiqh (jurisprudence)'. I have also observed his reliance on the authority of ʿAbd Allah bin Masʿūd, of whom the Prophet-peaea be upon him-has said: “I approve for my community whatever the son of Umm ʿAbd approves." He said, moreover: “A purse filled with learning"; he said also: “Take ye two-thirds of your religion from the son ofUmm ʿAbd." Unquestionably, the learning of the people of al-Kūfa is derived from these two men.
“The second point is that I deem him the earliest of the leading authorities in the law, and the closest of them to the age of the Companions, as well as being the most profound in faith, and the most devout. Now, the Prophet-God's peace and blessings be upon him-also said: ‘Cleave to that which is old.' He said, moreover: ‘The best of you are those living in the age in which I am, then those who are next to them, and then those in turn who immediately follow them. Then will falsehood spread about.' He lived in the age of truth, and of the people who spoke the truth.
“The third point is this: I have observed that all the learned differ from him on a question in which he is clearly in the right, and they are wrong." Said he: “And what is it?" I replied: “The learned professor is aware that it is a point of doctrine with him that the acceptance of a fee for the performance of any righteous deed or work on behalf of another person is not lawful. Now I have noticed that a person who goes on the Pilgrimage for hire undergoes a degradation of spirit; and if he repeats the deed his decadence increases and his piousness diminishes to the extent of his accepting recompense as a surrogate on two or even three Pilgrimages at the same time. However, I have never known such people to enjoy any blessing or gain any wealth thereby. The same is true in the case of the Imams [the Imam is an exemplary person who leads the community in prayer], the mu’adhdhins (who call to the prayers), and of those like them, who having merited their recompense from God have taken it from His creatures." On this, he said: “You have examined the matter closely, 0
of Abū Hanifa said he to me:
p. 127
107
THE REGION OF AL-IRAQ
Muqaddasl, and you have dealt with it with circumspection." Now, should someone say: “Abū Hanlfa has been deprecated by some," it may be said in reply: “Know that all men may be divided into three classes: a class for which there is complete agreement on their uprightness, a class for which there is complete agreement on their iniquity, and a class of those who are praised by some and disparaged by others. These last are the best of the three, and you may take as an instance of these the case of the Companions. The praised among them are Ibn Masʿūd, Muʿadh, and Zayd; the censured, ʿAbd Allah bin Ubayy. The best of them, however, are the four khalifs. Yet you know what the Kharijites and the ignorant among the Shlʿa say about them. Similarly, in relation to Abū Hanlfa, even though there is a minority of stupid people who disparage him, there is a population of the righteous who invoke his authority and extol him. Along with this, consider how God enlightened his heart so that he organized the sacred law into a system and relieved mankind of their burden. Moreover, consider his preference of accepting flogging and imprisonment rather than the office of Qadhl." The like of Abū Hanlfa is not to be seen anywhere!
The seven systems of reading the Quriin are employed in this region. Formerly in Baghdad the system of Hamza was the fashion; and that of Yaʿqūb al-Hadhraml was followed in al-Basra. I observed Abū Bakr al-Jartakl in leading the prayer reading according to this latter usage, in the mosque there; he said that it was the usage of the elders.
There is a variety of dialects in use, the most correct being that spoken at al-Kūfa; this is because of their closeness to the desert and their remoteness from the Nabataeans. Apart from that the language of the region is pleasant to hear, but most ungrammatical, especially in Baghdad. However in al-Bataʾih are the Nabataeans, a people having neither language nor brains.
The production of articles of commerce here is considerable. Have you not heard of the silks and linens of al-Basra, of the rare and exquisite articles produced there, and of its galbanum? It is a mine of pearls and gems, a port on the sea and an emporium on the land. Here are produced antimony, cinnabar, verdigris, and litharge of silver. Dates are exported from here to places far away, as well as henna, silk, essence of violet, and rosewater. At al-Ubulla, also, linen cloths of exquisite fineness are made, embroidered. In al-Kūfa are made turbans of silk, and essence of violet the most excellent. In the City of Peace elegant and varied apparel is made, and cloths of silk, and other materials. From this region come the excellent ʿAbbadanl mats, and the finest siimiin rush mats.
p. 128
Among the specialties of this region are the essence of violet, and aziidh dates of al-Kofa: the muhkam (strong cloth) and other uncommon things of
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
108
Baghdad, the superb ma<qili dates of al-Basra, the figs of Hulwan, the shim and bunni fishes of Wasit. In Nuʿmaniyya are made superb garments and cloths of wool the colour of honey, and at Baghdad shawls and turbans of special yakiinaki fabrics. There are, too, the kerchiefs of fabrics made in al-Qasr and al-Buwayb, p. 129 along with the woolen cloth of Takrit, and the draperies ofWasit.
Their Measures of Capacity
The qafiz is the equivalent of thirty mana,
the makkūk, five mana,
vhe karylaja, two r^at^a،,
their ratl is one half of a mann.
The Coinage of al-ʿIraq. Their coins are calculated by weight; however, their standard of weight is heavier than that of Khurasan.
Some Customs of the People of al-Iraq. The people here like to dress well, and wear the taylasiin. They usually wear sandals, dress up their turbans so that they are tall, and clothe themselves in fine calico. Seldom do they wear the taylasiin with a scalloped edge.
At the time of transport of new dates to Wasit, a watch is kept for the first boat to arrive, and the merchant who owns it decorates the riverbank as far as his shop with carpets and draperies.
Over the biers of women they build tall, rather crude canopies.
Those who cook harisa have places above their shops in which are mats, and tables with pickles. Here are servants with washbasins, pitchers, and potash [for soap], and when a person leaves the place he pays a single diinaq.
At the beginning of the season of violets they go the rounds of the markets with violets, dressed handsomely for the occasion.
By the doors of the mosques are washbasins for ablution, for the use ofwhich payment must be made.
The khatibs [who preach on Friday], wear their outer garment with full-length sleeves and girdle. They do not chant in reciting the call to prayer, and have a goodly number of other excellent practices.
Their waters are chiefly from the river Tigris, from the Euphrates, from the Zab, and from the Nahrawanat canals, and from these, also, they irrigate their fields. Water at al-Basra is scarce, for it must be brought by boat from al-Ubulla, as the water nearby is not so sweet, nor pleasant to taste. In fact there is the saying that the water of al-Basra is one third seawater, one third tidewater, and one third sewage. This is because at ebb tide the canal banks are laid bare and people relieve their bowels there: then the tide coming in carries the excrement with it. When the south wind blows the water becomes
warm.
109
THE REGION OF AL-'IRA.Q
The most grievous sectarian quarrels arise in al-Basra between the Rubaʿyyln, who are Shiʿa, and the Saʿdiyyln, who are Sunnl; the people of the countryside take part in these too. Indeed few are the towns in which there are not violent contentions for other than religious reasons.
The holy places in this region are many. At Kuta, Abraham was born, and
his fire lighted (Quran, sora 21, v. 69). At al-Kufa, Noah built his ark, and the
fountains on the surface of the earth bubbled over. (Quran, sora 11, v. 40). The monuments of ʿAli are there, with his grave, as well as the grave of al-Husayn, and the place of his killing. At al-Basra are the graves of Talha, Zubayr, the Prophet's brother, al-Hasan al-Basri, Anas bin Mlllik, ʿImrān bin Husayn, Sufyan al-Thawrl, Malik bin Dlnllr, CUtba the Slave, Muhammad bin Wllsiʿ, Salih al-Murri, Ayyūb al-Sikhtiyānl, Sahl al-Tustarl, and Rabiʿa al-ʿAdawiyya; there also is the grave oflbn Slllim. At Baghdad is the grave ofAbo Hanlfa over which Abo Jaʿfar al-Zammllm has built a mausoleum. Beside it, behind the Market ofYahya is a grave. The grave of Abo Yosuf is in the cemetery of the Quraysh. There also are the graves ofAhmad ibn Hanbal, Maʿrūf al-Karkhl, Bishr al-Hafl, and others. The grave of Salmlln is at al-Madllʾin.
oreover, at al-Kofa is the grave of a prophet whom I believe to be Yonus, peace be on him.
As for their dispositions, the people are gentle in nature, and show a ready wit. Nevertheless, when the vagabonds of Baghdad bestir themselves they work havoc there: depravity is rife. At al-Basra, however, are people who are upright, ascetic, pious, and chaste. They delay the performance of the noon prayer, but are beforehand with afternoon prayer. They linger in the Mosque for the arrival of people from the outlying areas. The Imam preaches every morning and prays in supplication. It is said that this practice derives from Ibn ʿAbbas, God be pleased with him.
Addition/version MS. c.
At al-Basra are to be found nine and forty varieties of dates: al-Dhabbl; al-Harthl; al-Khayshflm; al-Sahrl; al-Sukkar; al-Bashkar; al-Thabarzad; al-Ahmar; al-Asfar; al-Khastawanl; al-MaCqibl; al-Azadh; al-Hilyāth; al-Karāmī; al Qāthriyya [al-Qathawiyya?]; al-Qarlthl [al-Qarayzl?]; al-HayrOm; al-Badall; al-Rifl; alʿArOsl; al-Bildhanjanl; al-Ibrahlml; al-ZunbOrl; al-YaʿdhOdh [al Taʿdhndh?]; al-Burnllj; al-Mahdar; al-BlrOnl; al-Shuwayql; al-Jaysuwan; alʿAmrl; al-Qurashl; al-Yamanl; al-Barnl; al-Suhrlz; al-Hazkil; al-Hilblraln al-Asfar; al-Muhkarm; al-Qāsab; al-Jinllnl; al-Mahdahraj; al-Gharalnl; al-Sharql; al-Khwilrazmi; al-Fahl; al-Mabflrl; Baydh al-Baghl; al-Filwasan. To bo included also is Sayhilnl, which Abo Ahmed al-Mūsaʿl transplanted from al-Madlna; but the ripe dates of this variety at al-Basra are lopped of only every two months.
p. 130
Addition/version MS. c.
At al-Basra are to be found, also, twenty-four varieties of fish in the Tigris river:
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
110
al-Shlm; al-Zajr; al-Bunnl; al-Jirrl; al-Shilq; al-Zunjflr; al-Bimml; al-Sah [al-Saj?]; al-Sha’im; al-Kartak; al-Shilanl [al-Shilabl]; al-Dabaqah; al-Rama’lm; al-Baydhawl; al-Irbiyan; al-Birak; al-Barasūh [al-Barash،ūj.ʾ]; al-Isbū.l al-Harraq [al-Jawwaf]; al-Rabaltt [al-Rubaytha?]; al-ʿAyn [al-ʿAyr.ʾ]; al-Zajar; al-Sahadan [al-Shahadhan?]; al-Marimahl.
The Government. This region is the place of residence of the khalifs of
the House of ʿAbbas, God be pleased with him. It used to be always that their
word was law; however, they declined and the Daylamites overcame them; now, no one heeds them, or pays any attention to their opinions.
The first ruler of the line was Abu al-ʿAbbas ʿAbd Allah bin Muhammad bin ʿAli bin al-ʿAbbas: to him allegiance was pledged as sovereign leader in the year 132/769; he died in the year 136/756 at al-Anbar. His Qadhi [chief justice] was Yahya bin Saʿid al-Ansari. He was succeeded by al-Mansūr Abo Jaʿfar ʿAbdallah bin Muhammad, to whom the people pledged allegiance in the year 136/754; he died in the year 158/775. His Qadhis were CUbayd Allah bin Safwan, Sharik, and al-Hasan bin CUmara. After him al-Mahdi Abū ʿAbd Allah, son of al-Mansūr ascended the throne in the year 158/775. His Qadhis were Muhammad bin ʿAbd Allah bin ʿAlaqa, and ʿAfiya ibn Yazld. He died in the year 169/785. Thereupon, al-Hadi Abo Muhammad Mūsa, son ofal-Mahdl, received the allegiance of the people. His Qadis were Abo Yūsuf, and Saʿid bin ʿAbd al-Rahman. He died in the year 170/786, to be succeeded in authority by al-Rashld Abū Jaʿfar Harūn, son of al-Mahdi, on the night before Friday, the fourteenth day of Rablʿ I [third month of Muslin year], the year being 170/786. His Qadhis were al-Husayn bin al-Hasan al-Sūfi, then ʿAwn bin ʿAbd Allah al-Masʿūd!, and Hafs bin Ghiyath. He died at Tns in the year 193/809. On this, his son, al-Amin Muhammad was made khalif aftcr seven days of the month of Jumada II [sixth month of Muslim year] had passed, in the year 193/809.
His brother al-Maʾmūm rose up against him and killed him, and was, in turn recognized as khalif in the year 198/813. The Qadhis of al-Maʾmūm were al-Waqidl, Muhammad bin ʿAbd al-Rahman al-Makhzūmi, aftcr him Bishr bin al-Walid, and Yahya bin Aktham.
He died in the year 218/833 at Tarsūs. Then Abū Ishaq Muhammad bin al-Rashid, al-Muʿtasim, succeeded, whose Qadhi was Ahmad bin Abi Duʾad. Al-Muʿtasim died in the year 227/842, and his son, al-Wathiq Abū Jaʿfar Harūn was acknowledged khalif, and his Qadhi was Ahmad bin Abi Duʾad. He died in 232/847, and was succeeded by his brother Abu al-Fadhl Jaʿfar al-Mutawakkil; his Qadhi was Jaʿfar bin ʿAbd al-Wahid al-Hashimi. He died in 247/862 and his son, al-Muntasir Abū Jaʿfar Muhammad was proclaimed khalif, and his Qadhi was Jaʿfar bin ʿAbd al-Wahid. He died in the year 248/862, and was succeeded by his son Abu al-ʿAbbas Ahmad al-Mustaʿin, whose Qadhi was Jaʿfar bin Muhammad ibn ʿAmmar. He abdicated after three years and eight months, and was succeeded by al-Muʿtazz, son of al-Mutawakkil; his Qadhi was al-Hasan bin Muhammad bin Abi al-Shawarib. After him, al-Muʿtamid Abu al-ʿAbbas
p. 131
p. 132
111
THE REGION OF AL-IRAQ
Ahmad, son of al-Mutawakkil, received allegiance as khalif in 256/870; his Qadhi was Ibn Abi al-Shawarib. He died in 279/892, and was succeeded by his son, Abu al-ʿAbbas Ahmad bin Abi Ahmad, al-Muʿtadhid; his Qadhis were Ismaʿil bin Ishaq, Yūsuf bin Yaʿqūb, and Ibn Abi al-Shawarib. He died in 289/902. His son Abo Muhammad ʿAli al-Muktafi was proclaimed khalif, and his Qadhis were Yosuf bin Yaʿqūb and Muhammad his son. He died in the year 295/908. Then Abu al-Fadhl Jaʿfar al-Muqtadir bi-Allah, also son of al-Muʿtadhid, succeeded him. His Qadhis were Muhammad bin Yosuf bin Yaʿqub, the latter's son Yosuf, and Yaʿqūb Abo ʿAmr. This khalif was killed in the year 320/932. Al-Qahir succeded him for a year and six months; after him, al-Radhl ruled for seven years and ten days; then al-Muttaql for three years and eleven months as khalif. After him, al-Mustakfi became khalif in the year 333/944; his Qadhi was Abo ʿAbd Allah ibn Abi Mosa al-Dharir. He was blinded in the year 334/946, and al-Mu،Iʿ Abu al-Qasim al-Fadhl was placed on the throne: all of these were descendants of al-Muʿtadhid. Al-Mut،ʿ remained in power until the year 363/974, when he abdicated and placed on the throne his son ʿAbd al-Karlm Abo Bakr al-Taʾiʿ, whose Qadhi is Abo Muhammad ʿUbayd Allah bin Ahmad bin Maʿrūf.
The first of the Daylamites to seize power over the area was [Muʿizz al- Dawla] Abu al-Hasan [in fact: Abu al-Husayn] ibn Buwayh, and his son, Bakhtiyar succeeded him. ʿAdhud al-Dawla came next in succession, and after him his son, Balkarzar; later, his elder son, Abu al-Fawaris succeeded.
The Land-Taxes. The cultivable land of this region amounts to thirty six millionfartb fjarīb, land measure sixty cubits square; see p. 451 text]. On an acre of wheat there is a tax of four dirhams; on an acre of barley, two dirhams; and on an acre of palm trees, eight dirhams. This assessment was fixed by ʿUmar himself. He also imposed a poll tax on five hundred thousand dhimmi. So the revenue of the Sawad [the rural area of Iraq] amounted to one hundred twenty-eight million dirhams. ʿUmar bin ʿAbd al-ʿAzlz collected taxes to the extent of one hundred twenty-four million dirhams. Al-Hajjaj collected taxes to the extent of eighteen million, that is, without the one hundred million. Al-Basra and al-Kūfa are taxed by tithes. I read in a book in the library of ʿAdhud al-Dawla that the value of all the crops of the Sawad amounts to eighty-six millon seven hundred eighty thousand dirhams; and from other sources of revenue in the Sawad four million eight thousand dirhams are realized. The revenue from the District of the Tigris is eight million five hundred thousand dirhams.
Al-ʿIrāq is divided into tassūj (townships) to the number of sixty:
In the district of Hulwan, five; in Shadh Qubadh, eight; in Barmasiyan, three; in Upper Bih Qubadh, six; in Middle (Bih Qubadh), four;
p. 133
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
112
in Ardashlr-Babak:ln, five; in Shadh SabOr, four; in Shadh Bahman, four; in Ast:ln al-ʿAl, four; in Lower Bih Qubadh five; in Shadh Hurmuz, seven; in Nahrawanat, five.
As for imposts, they are heavy and manifold, and ofrecent imposition. They are imposed on commerce on the river and on land, entailing rigorous inspection and rather severe exactions at al-Basra; it is likewise at al-Bataʾih, where the arrangement and assessment of goods are conducted. The Qarāmita have a tollhouse at the gate of al-Basra, the Daylamites have a similar one, so that on a single sheep up to four dirhams are collected. The gate is not open except for one hour a day. When people return from the Pilgrimage, taxes are collected both on the loads of hides and on the Arabian camels; similarly at al-Koff and Baghdad. On a camelborne litter sixty dirhams are levied on the pilgrims; on a howdah, or on a load of linen, one hundred dirhams; and on the smaller howdah fifty dirhams, and one hundred at al-Basra and al-Kofa.
The area of al-ʿIrāq: its length from the sea to al-Sinn is one hundred twenty-five farsakhs; its breadth from al-ʿUdhayb to ʿAqabat Hulwan is eighty farsakhs. So if you calculate it accordingly, the area amounts to ten thousand farsakhs.
The distances on main roads: You take the road from Baghdad to Nahr al-Malik, one stage;
thence to al-Qasr, one stage;
thence to Hamm:ln Ibn ʿUmar one stage;
thence to al-Kofa, one stage;
thence to al-Qadisiyya, one stage.
From Baghdad to al-Mada'in, one stage; thence to al-Sib, one stage; thence to Dayr al-ʿĀqūl, one stage; thence to Jarjarāya, one stage; thence to al-Nuʿmāniyya, one stage; thence to Jabbul, one stage; thence to Nahr Sabus, one stage; thence to Mat:lra, two barids [barid equals six miles]; thence to al-Jazlra, the same; thence to al-Ishāqiyya, one stage; thence to al-Mihrāqa, two barids; thence to al-Haddādiyya, the same; thence to Turumāna, one stage; thence to Wasit, one stage.
p. 134
113
THE REGION OF AL-'IRĀQ.
You may also go from al-Haddadiyya to al-Zubaydiyya, one stage; thence to Wasit, two barids.
From al-Mihraqa to al-Jamida, two barids; and from al-Haddadiyya to al-Sallq,
two barids .
From al-Basra to al-Ubulla, two barids; thence to Bayan, one stage; thence to ʿAbbadan, one stage.
From Baghdad to al-Saylahin, two barids; thence to al-Anbar, one stage; thence to al-Rabb, one stage; thence to Hit, two stages.
You may go from Baghdad to al-Baradan, two barids; thence to ʿUkbara, one stage; thence to Bahamsha, half a stage; thence to al-Qadisiyya, one stage; thence to al-Karkh, one stage; thence to Jabilta, one stage; thence to al-Sūdaqaniya, the same; thence to Barimma, the same; thence to al-Sinn, the same.
From Baghdad to al-Nahrawan, two barids; thence to Dayr Barimma, the same; thence to al-Daskara, one stage; thence to Jalūla, one stage; thence to Khanlqln, one stage.
From Hit to al-Na'ūsa, one stage; thence to ʿAna, one stage; thence to Alosa, one stage; thence to al-Fuhayma, one stage; thence to al-Haditha, one stage; thence to al-Nahiyya (al-Nahba), one stage.
You go from Hulwan to Madharwastan, two barids; thence to al-Marj, one stage; thence to Qasr Yazid, two barids; thence to al-Zubaydiyya, one stage; thence to Qasr ʿAmr, one stage; thence to Qarmasin, half a stage.
p. 135
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
114
From Hulwiln to Qasr Shlrln, one stage;
thence to Khilniqln, one stage.
From al-Ubulla to al-Khūziyya, one stage by water; from al-Ubulla to Nahr Dubbil, one stage;
thence to Fam al-ʿAdhudl [the mouth of the ʿAdhudl Canal], one stage. ʿAskar Abl Jaʿfar lies opposite al-Ubulla, and there is a ferry here.
Wilsit (central) was so named because the distance from it to each of the following: Baghdild, al-Kūfa, al-Basra, Hulwiln, and al-Ahwilz, is, in every instance, fifty farsakhs. It is not at the centre of al-ʿIrāq, for the town there is Dayr al-ʿĀqūl. There is also a route from al-Kofa.
The Region of Aqnr (AlJazira) [Upper Mesopotamia]
p. 136
This also is an important region, one of superiority, for here are the shrines of prophets, the abodes of holy men. Here the ark of Noah came to rest on al-Jodl; here settled his associates, and built the town of Thamanln. God restored the people ofJonas to his grace here, and caused the spring of water to gush forth. Here also is the entryway of Dhu al-Qarnayn (Qurʾān, sūra 18, v.
Realm of Darkness. Here also occurred the remarkable events of Dadhiyana. God caused to sprout there for Jonas the gourd (Qurʾān, sOra 37, v. 146); from it goes out the blessed river ofour holy community, the renowned Tigris. Is not the mosque of Jonas there at Tall Tawba (Hill of Repentance), seven visits to which are said to be the equivalent of going on a pilgrimage; and numerous shrines and many excellences? It is a frontier area ofthe Muslims, a stronghold of their strongholds; for at present, Amid is the base of their campaign, Mawsil one of their greatest resources, and Jazlrat ibn ʿUmar one of their most delightful parks. Along with this, it lies between al-ʿIrāq and Syria, and the way stations for the Arabs in the practice of Islam. This region is the source of the best horses, and of most of the provisions of al-ʿIrāq. Prices are low, fruits excellent. It is the country of upright men.
We have been informed of a tradition by al-Hakim Abo Nasr Mansūr bin Muhammad al-Harbi, muhtasib ofBukhara, who had it from al-Haytham bin Kulayb, who had it from Abo Yaʿʿa al-Hasan bin Ismaʿll and Abo Sulayman Muhammad bin Mansūr al-Faqih, who both had it from Ismaʿll, that is Ibn Abi Uways, who had it from Kathlr bin ʿAbd Allah, who had it from his (Kathlr) father, who had it from his (Kathlr) grandfather, who related that the Messenger of God-God’s peace and blessings be upon him-said: “Four mountains there p. 137 are which are of the mountains of Paradise, four rivers of the rivers of Paradise, four bloody battles of the battles of Paradise." It was asked of him which are the mountains. Said he, “Uhud, it loves us and we love it; and Majanna, a mountain of the mountains of Paradise; and al-Tor (Sinai), a mountain of the mountains of Paradise. The rivers are the Nile, the Euphrates, Sayhan, and Jayhan; the bloody battles are Badr, Uhud, al- Khandaq, and Hunayn."
The Euphrates, which has this dignification, curves around this region, and the Tigris, a river of renown, rises from here. The region is favored with blessings, sacred shrines, frontier fortresses, and mosques; yet it is the abode of highwaymen, the roads through it are difficult, and the Romaeans have devastated its frontiers.
This is the form and representation of it. [Map VI]
We have made our divisions of this region to correspond with the tribes of the Arabs there, so that the areas they occupy may be known and distinguished from one another. We have designated three districts, according to the number
83) to the Jirjls with
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
116
Map VI: Al-Jazira (see p. 410).
From MS. Sprenger 5—Ahlwardt 6034 by kind permission of the Staatsbibliothek Preussischer Kulturbesitz, Berlin, Orientabteilung.
117
THE REGION OF AQUR (AL-JAZIRA)
of their tribes. The first from the side of al-ʿIrāq is Diyar Rablʿa; then Diyar Mudhar, then Diyar Bakr; in it also are four related areas.
Diyar RabIʿa of which the capital is al-Mawsil; among its towns are al-Hadltha, Maʿathaya, al-Hasaniyya, Tall ʿAfar, Sinjar, al-Jibal, Balad, Adhrama, BarqaʿJd, Naslbln, Dara, Kafartūtha, Raʾs al-ʿAyn, Thamanln. Its related area is Jazlrat Ibn ʿUmar: its towns, Fayshabur, Baʿaynatha, al-Mughltha, al-Zawazan.
OfDiyar Mudhar, the capital is al-Raqqa؛ some of its towns are al-Muhtariqa, al-Rafiqa, Khanllqa, al-Harlsh, Tall Mahra, Bajarwan, Hisn Maslama, Tarʿūz, Harran, al-Ruha. The related area: Sarūj, Kafarzab, Kafarsirin.
Of Diyar Bakr, the capital is Amid; among its towns are Mayyafariqln, Tall p. 138 Fafan, Hisn Kayfa, alFar, Hadhiya; and there are others.
Of the towns of al-Furatiyya (the Euphrates district) the largest is Rahbat Ibn Tawq; then Qarqisiya, ʿA.na, al-Daliya, al-Hadltha.
The capital of the Khabūr area is ʿAraban; of its towns are: al-Husayn, al-Shamslniyya, Maykasln, Sukayr al-ʿAbbās, al-Khaysha, al-Saklniyya, al-TbdadIr.
Al-Mawsil (Mosul) is the metropolis of this region. It is a splendid city, beautifully built; the climate is pleasant, the water healthy. Highly renowned, and of great antiquity, it is possessed of excellent markets and inns, and is inhabited by many personages of account, and learned men; nor does it lack a high authority in the Traditions, or a celebrated doctor of the law. From here come provisions for Baghdad, and thither go the caravans of al-Rihab. It has, besides, parks, specialties, excellent fruits, very fine baths, magnificent houses, and good meats: all in all the town is thriving. However, the gardens are remote from the city, the south wind is noxious, and the level of the water is far from the surface of the ground, so as to make the drawing of it difficult. The town is in the form of a taylasiin just as is al-Basra, and is not large in size. Along one-third of its boundary is a building like a fortress, called al-Murabbaʿa (the Square). It lies on the river Zubayda, and is known as Sūq al-Arba<aʾ (the Wednesday Market). Within is an expansive area in which the hired people and the harvesters congregate, and at each corner of the area stands an inn. Between the mosque and the riverbank is the distance of a bow shot; it is built on higher ground, and is approached by steps from the side towards the river: fewer steps are on the market side. It is entirely surrounded by arched galleries of biiniit (a soft marble) stone. The front of the roofed part of the mosque is without any doors. Most of the markets are roofed. The wells are saline; drinking water is derived from the Tigris, and from the Zubayda river.
Names of some of the main roads here are Dayr al-Aʿa, Baslūt, al-Jassasln, (the sellers of gypsum), Bani Mayda, al-Jassasa (the gypsum quarry), the road of the Millstone of the Amir al-Muʾminln, of al-Dabbaghin (the tanners), and the road ofJamll.
The city lies along the bank of the river, while the palace of the khalif is distant half afarsakh from the other side of the river, near ancient Nūnawa. The
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
118
name of al-Mawsil used to be Khawlaq, but when the Arabs extended their abodes to this place, and appointed it their centre, it was named al-Mawsil. Nūnawa (Nineveh) is near al-Mawsil; it is the city of Yūnus, son of Matta. It was guarded by a fortress which the wind has thrown down. Now it consists of cultivated fields, beside which flows the river al-Khflsar. Mar Juhayna is situated on the Tigris, towards al-Mawsil and towards al-ʿIrāq; it has many dovecotes, and a fortress built of gypsum and stone. The mosque stands in the centre of the town.
Al-Hadltha is also on the Tigris, situated on an acclivity so that steps lead up to it. The mosque is close to the riverbank, and, is shaped like a taylasiin [semi-circular in form]. The buildings are of clay, with the exception of the mosque. This town is on the east bank of the river.
Maʿlathaya is towards Amid; it is small, has many gardens, and is situated along the banks of a stream. The buildings are of clay, and the mosque is on a hill.
Al-Hasaniyya is on a river that approaches from Urmiya: this is the river over which stands the [masonry] Bridge of Sanja. The mosque is in the middle of the town, and the river flows beside it.
Thamanln, a town situated on a copious stream which flows from Armenia, at the foot of Mount al-Jūdl. Abū SaʿJd bin Hamdan related to me that he had the following tradition from Abū Hamid al-Julūdī, who had it from Abū Hilniʾ, who said his father told him he had it from ʿAbd al-Munʿim bin Idris, who had it from his father, who had it from Wahb bin Munabbih: when Noah came out of the ark, he built a town and named it ThamanIn (“eighty"); this was the first town after the Flood, and Noah built it according to their number, a house for every one of those who were with him; moreover, it is the first town ever built in al-JazIra.
JazIrat Ibn ʿUmar: a large town around which water flows on three sides, the Tigris flowing between it and the mountain. It is a very fine, pleasant place, its buildings are of stone, and it is situated on the east bank of the Tigris. It is muddy in winter.
Bilʿaynatha is a delightful and pleasant place. It is divided into twenty-five quarters, with gardens and streams interpenetrating. There is not the like of it in al-ʿIrāq: it is a place of plenty, and low prices.
Balad is on the Tigris, which here has an abundant flow; in it are many castles. It is well-built of gypsum and stone. The markets are spacious, the mosque in the center of the town.
Adhrama is a small town in the steppe; the inhabitants get their drinking water from wells; their buildings are dome-shaped.
Barqaʿld is somewhat the same, except that it is larger.
NasIbIn is more delightful, smaller, but broader than al-Mawsil. It has an abundance of fruits, excellent baths and lofty palaces. The people are prosperous and refined. The market extends from gate to gate, and a citadel of stone and
p. 139
p. 140
119
THE REGION OF AQUR (AL-JAZIRA)
cement stands over the town; the mosque is in the middle of the town. But may God protect us from the scorpions of this place!
Dara is small and pleasant. An aqueduct distributes water throughout the town; it is carried over the housetops, and after gushing out at the mosque it drops into a low-lying area. The buildings are of black stone and cement.
Sinjar is in a waterless desert: palm trees are there in abundance. Shoemakers are here in great numbers, and the mosque is in their quarter. The people's drinking water is from a stream of passably good water, and from numerous springs.
Raʾs al-ʿAyn is on a plain, where the lower portion has many holes made by the water, which gushes forth in springs. Here is a small lake in which the water is to a depth of about two fathoms, so clear that a dirham thrown into it could be seen on the bottom. Their buildings are of stone and gypsum. They have gardens and cultivated fields. Three hundred sixty springs combine their fresh waters here to form a stream that flows to al-Raqqa. [In fact to Qarqisiya]
Amid is a well fortified town with beautiful and remarkable buildings. It resembles Antakiya, having an encircling outer wall shaped somewhat like a chair, with gates and parapets. Between the walls and the fortress is an extensive open space. The town is smaller than Antakiya, and is built of hard black stone, as are also the foundations of the houses. It has a number of springs to the west of the Tigris, and is spacious and attractive. It is a frontier town for the Muslims, and an inexpugnable fortress. The mosque is in the centre ofthe town. The town has five gates: the Water Gate, the Mountain Gate, the Gate of the Romaeans, the Hill Gate, and the Gate ofAnas [also named Bab al-Sirr, “the Secret Gate"]. The last named gate is small, and is required in time ofwar. The fortress is built partly on the mountain. Some of the forts are on a hill; I know of no town that the Muslims have today that is better fortified, or an outpost more important than Amid.
MayyafariqIn is a pleasant, well-fortified town, with battlements, an encircling stone wall, and a ditch; however, there is a poverty of learning, and of gardens. Drinking water is from springs and a stream. It is muddy in winter, a filthy place, and truly the sewer of the region.
Al-Jibal (al-Janāb?)is a secure town having a fortress and suburbs. A mosque stands at the edge of the town. The drinking water of the inhabitants is from canals of middling water, their buildings are of stone and clay. The town wall is by no means well fortified.
Tall Fafan lies in the direction of the mountain between the Tigris and the Razm. It is surrounded by gardens, and prices there are low. The markets are roofed, and their buildings are of clay.
Hisn Kayfa is a place of abundance. A strong citadel is there, and many churches. The drinking water of the inhabitants is from the Tigris. Al-Far and Hadhiya are smaller towns.
p. 141
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
120
This then is all we know about the towns of this district. With regard to Bidlls, different opinions are expressed, which we mention in the region of al-Rihab.
Al-Raqqa is the capital ofDiyar Mudhar, on the Euphrates. It is fortified by a broad wall, on top of which two horsemen can ride abreast. It is not a large town and has two gates, yet it is a pleasant restful place. It was platted long ago, and has good markets and many villages and gardens. The land is bounteous, and yields the finest soap, and olives. It has a remarkable mosque and very good baths. Its markets are roofed and shaded, its palaces highly decorated. The name of the town is well known in both provinces: Syria is on its border, and the Euphrates is on its side. Learning flourishes there. However, the Arabs surround it on all sides, and the roads to it are difficult. Al-Raqqa al-Muhtariqa (Raqqa, the Burnt) is close to it, but it is abandoned and in ruin. Al-Rafiqa is the suburb of al-Raqqa; its mosque stands in the Goldsmiths' quarter, while the mosque of al-Raqqa is in the Drapers' quarter. In this latter mosque are two jujube trees and a mulberry. Close by is a mosque supported by a single column.
Harran is a most pleasant city, over which stands a fortress of stone. It is somewhat like Jerusalem in the beauty of its architectural style. There is a channel here the source of which is not known. The mosque is at the edge of the town. The fields are irrigated from wells. It produces most excellent cotton. The integrity of the weights and measures here is proverbial.
Al-Ruha is on the design of al-Tīb, and is fortified. The mosque, somewhat run down, is at the edge of the town. Here is a remarkable church with vaulted galleries decorated with mosaic: it is one of the wonders of the world.
ʿAraban is the capital of the district of al-Khabnr, on a high hill, and surrounded by gardens. Prices there are low, and there are many cultivated fields. The other towns are more spacious. Of the district of the Euphrates the most important city is al- Rahba, a large town on the desert side. It is in the shape of a taylasiin [semi-circular], and has a fortress and a suburb. The remaining towns all lie towards the desert, and are flourishing.
A Summary Account of Conditions in this Region The climate and the customs of the region of Aqūr approximate those of Syria, and are somewhat similar to those of aJ-ʿIraq. There are hot areas here in which are date palms, such as Sinjar and the towns of the Euphrates. The district of Amid is cold because of its proximity to the mountains; of its towns, the healthiest climate is that of al-Mawsil (Mosul). Most of the buildings are of stone. I am not aware of any bad water here, pestilential river valley, or food that is not appetizing. There are no Magians at all here; Sabians are found in al-Ruha and Harran only, in the entire realm. Here is no lake, nor does the country border on the sea. Its preachers are of little repute, and there is no mart for matters of the spirit.
p. 142
121
THE REGION OF AQUR (AL-JAZIRA)
With regard to their religious sects, they are followers of tradition and corporate authority, except in ʿĀna, where Muʿtazilites abound. Ofthe rationalists you find only the schools of Abo Hanifa and al-Shafiʿi. Some Hanbalites are there, and a manifest faction of Shlʿa. There is no temptation to heresy to divide the hearts of the people, for their jurists do not exchange views on scholastic theology. They prefer the system of reading of ʿAbd Allah ibn ʿĀmir.
The contention between the Bajat and the Abyssinians occurred while I was at Zabid, and the Qadhi deputed me to lead them in the sunset and night
prayers. One day he said to me: “The congregation is certainly thankful to you, but I have a rebuke for you." Said I, “On what ground? May God strengthen the Qadhi!" Said he, “You are a man who has devoted himself to the study of the law according to the practice of the people of al-Kūfa. Why then do you not read according to their system, and what is it that has inclined you to reading according to the system oflbn ʿĀmir?" Said I, “There are four reasons." Said he, “What are they?" Said I, “The first reason is this: Ibn Mujahid has related three traditions about Ibn ʿĀmir. The first of these is that he read the Quriin under the discipline of TJthman bin ʿAffan; the second is that he heard the Quriin from Uthman when he was a boy; the third is that he read it under a person who had himself read under TJthman. Now this can not be said of any other master of recitation. In fact, between every one of them and ʿAli, ʿAbd Allah, Ubayy or Ibn ʿAbbas, there are two men or three. So the one, then, between whom and. TJthmanson whose version of the Quriin the Muslims have decided unanimously, and agreed, without exception, on its compilation, and used it with one another time after time-such a man, I say, is more worthy to be followed in reading than another between whom and one whose compilation is not used anyway, and on whose version ofthe Qurʾān there is no agreement, there are two men or three. Furthermore, I looked at the old copies of the Quriin in Syria, Egypt and al-Hijaz that are attributed to TJthman, and they are not at variance with the reading of Ibn ʿĀmir one whit.
“The second reason: I have noticed the system oflbn ʿĀmir to be consistent. If he uses the ‘t' or makes a difficult pronunciation in one case he employs it in all similar instances; whereas others say, ‘in such-and-such a sūra it is “t" and
in such-and-such a sūra it is “y", and read in one place saddan, in another place suddan; and again khariijan and kharjan, kurhan and karhan, and similar instances of this are many. Now, as a man who has always exerted himself in the study of the law, I deemed the system of Ibn ʿĀmir more admissible as far as I am concerned, and closer to the methods of jurisprudence.
“The third reason is that I have found that the other readers have from three to thirty different readings being attributed as derived from them; however, Ibn ʿĀmir has no one except Yahya through whom he transmitted the reading. Anyway the differences in his readings are as heard from Yahya, because both Ibn Dhakwan and Hisham bin ʿAmmar were readers under the discipline ofYahya, so I was satisfied that he had a sound knowledge and certainty of his reading.
p. 143
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
122
“The fourth reason is that I am a man from Syria, and even though I had separated myself from the school of law there, nevertheless I do not wish to separate myself from them in a style of reading the superiority of which is unquestionable as far as I am concerned." Then said the Qadhl: “How capable you are, 0 Abo ʿAbd Allah, and how splendid your affirmation. In fact this reading now has risen in my esteem after it had been one of those I had no particular use for." Now, should a disputant say: “And has not Ibn ʿĀmir been inconsistent in a number of places," I should answer: “Had he not been inconsistent I should make no use of his reading, and we would indeed have been uncertain about it, because reading should not be learned according to analogy. But when he was inconsistent with us we knew that he was in fact adhering to an p. 144 authority and deriving from him; and his transmission is entirely consistent with the rules". If such a one should say: “But did not our predecessors challenge him, and find fault in some words," I answer: “No one of the authorities in reading was exempted from attack. Do you not see how they attacked ʿĀsim and
iza in the word dhaCf(Quran, sOra 8, v. 66), and Abo ʿAmr in nansd>ha and in hadhayni? But the distinguished scholars vindicated them to the public at large, and pronounced their views correct. In any case, no one attacks the acknowledged authorities but an ignoramus." If he should say that Ibn ʿĀmir is relatively unknown, and his reading undistinguished, I should reply to him:
“Had Ibn ʿĀmir been in al-Hijaz or al-ʿIrāq he would not have been unknown,
nor would his reading have been exceptional. But since he was in Egypt, in a remote part of the realm, few sought him out to learn from him, and few transmitted his style of reading. Do you not see that al-AwzaʿI was one of the
transmitted his style of reading. Do you not see that al-AwzaʿI was one of the great scholars in jurisprudence, and his system has fallen into disuse for this same reason? However, ifthese two men had been on the route of the pilgrims,
people from the east and from the west would have disseminated their systems." Now if this person should continue and say, “Are you not one of those who
have met the masters of knowledge and piety, and do not most of them forbid exceptionally private systems of reading, and prefer that in general usage?" I
should reply, “Yes! but while I have traveled about, meeting the master readers, I liked to read before them, and thus benefit from them. So when I would read according to the generally accepted system they would belittle me and assign me
to their disciples; but when I read after an individual system, they took personal interest in me."
The waters ofthis region are plentiful, most ofthem deriving from the Tigris, the Euphrates, and the Khabor, this last a river that comes from springs the waters of which collect and flow into the Euphrates. As for the source of the Tigris of al-ʿIraq, it emerges from under Kahf al-Zulamat (the Cave of the Dark Regions), its water green. to where the Zab joins it. mill wheel. The first river to join it is the River DhIb, next is the river al-Rams,
It is later joined by a number of streams, on its way Where it starts the Tigris cannot turn more than one
123
THE REGION OF AQUR (AL-JAZIRA)
then al-MasOliyilt. Below this it crosses al-Kilrūkha. Further on it receives the Sarbat, then the spring of Tall Filfiln; then the river al-Rizb, then the Zilb, after which you are in al-ʿIrilq. There is a saying that the Euphrates is blessed, the Tigris accursed.
A number of articles of commerce are produced in this region. From Mosul come grains, honey, namaksūd (dried meat), coal, fats, cheese, honeydew, sumac, pomegranate seeds, pitch, iron, metal buckets, knives, arrows, most excellent salted fish, and chains. From Sinjilr come the kernels of almonds, pomegranate seeds, reeds, and sumac. From Naslbln: chestnuts-a nut somewhat bigger and more delicious than the hazelnut, and not round; also dried fruits, balances, inkstands, and beating rods for fulling. From al-Raqqa: soap, olive oil, reed pens; from Harriln: qubbayt (preserves of locust fruit and nuts], honey of bees in earthen wine jars, cotton, and balances. From al-Jazlra: walnuts, almonds, clarified butter, and the very finest horses; from al-Hasaniyya: cheese, partridge, chickens, cheeses of the Shlrilz variety, dried fruit, and raisins. From Maflathilyil, dairy products, coal, grapes, fresh fruit, cannabis seed, hemp, and dried meat. From Balad, biestings in jars, carried by boat: a jar fetched five danaqs, and contains five manas [mana equals two pounds]. From al-Rahba quinces of the most surpassing excellence; from Amid, woolen cloths and Romaean linens of the type made in Sicily.
The specialties of this region are horses, soap, chains, leather straps; and the qubbayt, cotton, and balances of Harriln.
Dry measures: these are the mudd, the makkūk, the qafiz, and the kiira. The makkūk equals fifteen ratls, and the mudd a fourth of this. The kiira is two hundred forty ratls, the qafiz a fourth of this. The makkūk is a fourth of a qafiz. The ratls of this region are the same as those ofBaghdild; and theirfarq, also the same as that of Baghdild, equals thirty-six ratls.
The vernacular is standard and refined, and more correct than that of Syria, since the people here are Arabs. The best language is that of Mosul, where the people also are the most handsome of face. This town also is more healthy in climate than the rest of the region. The city contains people from most of the tribes, but the greatest number among them are the Hilrithl.
There are sacred places here: in the countryside near Mosul are the Mosque of Jonas, and other places associated with his name. Close to Ancient Nonawil is a place known as Tall Tawba (Hill ofRepentance) atop which is a mosque, and residences for the devout. It was built by Jamlla, daughter of Nilsir al-Dawla, and she settled a considerable bequest on it. It is said that seven visits to it equal a Pilgrimage to Makka; it is visited on Thursday nights. It is the place whither
p. 145
p. 146
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
124
the people ofJonas went when they were convinced of impending chastisement. Half a farsakh from this place is ʿAyn Yonus (the Spring of Jonas). Outside the town of Balad is a spring out of which it is claimed Jonas emerged: healing of leprosy is sought in its waters. Here is a mosque in his name, and also the place of the gourd plant. (Quran, sora 37, v. 146).
A farsakh distant from Mayyafariqin is Dayr Toma (Monastery of St. Thomas), in which is a body, desiccated, standing erect, and claimed to be that of one of the apostles ofJesus Christ. The Fortress ofDhu al-Qamayn is on the way to al-Rihab; it is strong and well equipped. Below it is the Cave ofDarkness which Dhu al-Qarnayn entered. Maslama, son of ʿAbe al-Malik was bent on entering it, procuring torches and candles; but they were extinguished and he returned. Among the marvels of this region: at Nasibin is a spring from which flows white lime, and it is used as lime in baths and houses. In the area of Mosul is Dayr al-Kalab [the Monastery of Hydrophobia] whither is carried one bitten by a rabid dog; if the person remains with the monks of this monastery for fifty days, he is made to recover by the grace of God, the Most High. In this district also is a spring, and whoso drinks from it dies after three days. A barid [two leagues] distant from Mosul is the village of Baʿashiqa, where a plant grows that whoso plucks it, should he be suffering from haemorrhoids or scrofula, his disabilities fall away from him. Indeed, were a person suffering these two p. 147 afflictions to send a man with a dirham and a large needle to a community there who inherit the capability, and were any one of them to carry the needle to where this plant grows, and pluck it in the name of the afflicted one, this one is cured, though he were in al-Shash; the other man may use the dirham for himself.
It used to be said that the wonders of the world are three: the Lighthouse of Alexandria, the [masonry] Bridge of Sanja, and the Church of al-Ruha; however, when the Masjid al-Aqsa was built it was substituted for the church. When the earthquake demolished the Masjid, the Mosque of Damascus, in turn, was substituted for it. This Bridge of Sanja is distant five farsakhs from Mount al-Jodi; it is a large, overtowering bridge and goes as far as the mountain. It is constructed on intersticed stone, and when the water overflows it, it sways.
We must certainly give an account of al-Qustantlniyya (Constantinople), seeing that the Muslims have a house there in which they gather and profess their religion. There have been many conflicting reports and false statements about this place, and about the city itself, its dimensions and its architecture, so I thought I should portray itto the eye, and clarify it to the mind. I should, too, mention the routes thither, as the Muslims are in need of this when they purpose to ransom prisoners, send dispatches, invade, or conduct trade.
Know that when Maslama, son of ʿAbd al-Malik, invaded the country of the Romaeans and entered this metropolis, he imposed as a condition on the Romaean Dog [i. e. the Emperor of Constantinople] that he build a house opposite his palace on the race course, in which notables and persons of rank could reside
125
THE REGION OF AQUR (AL-JAZIRA)
if taken prisoner: in this way they would be under his protection and care. He consented, and built Dar al-Balat [Palatium; Royal Court]. The Balat itself is situated beyond the race course, and here the royal silk brocade is manufactured.
Constantinople is about the size of al-Basra, perhaps smaller; its buildings are of stone. It is fortified as other cities are, but protected by one fortress alone. The sea touches one side of it, and the racecourse is on its shore. Dar al-Balat and the royal palace are in a line, with the racecourse between the two buildings, their doors facing each other. In the middle of the racecourse is a platform with p. 148 steps going up to it. None of the Muslims may reside in Dar al-Balat except notables, and these are officially privileged, and may promenade. The rest of the prisoners from the commonalty of the Muslims they enslave, and engage them in productive tasks. The discreet man, therefore, is he who, when asked about his craft, does not reveal it. Sometimes the prisoners may trade with one another and profit themselves. This people does not compel any one of their prisoners to eat the flesh of swine, neither do they pierce the nose or slit the tongue.
From the palace of the [Romaean] Dog to Dar al-Balat a midway stretches, and on it stands the image of a horse in bronze. At times appointed the inhabitants meet for sporting contests; in these contests the name of the king is “Waynatwa" and the name of the chief minister is “Brasiyana." [see Edward Gibbon, The History ofthe Decline	Fall of 1،lie Rom^n Empire, cap. XL-YĪ\If vhey want to
make a prediction from their games they form two groups, and race horses around the platform. If the horses of the party of the [Romaean] Dog come first they say that the Romaeans will have the victory, and they shout, “Waynatwa, Waynatwa." If the horses of the minister's party should win, they say that the victory will be to the Muslims, and shout, “Brasiyana, Brasiyana," and they go to the Muslims, and give them robes of honour; but they are jealous of them, because theirs is the victory.
The city has very fine markets, prices are low, and fruits plentiful.
There are Muslims also in the towns of al-Tibn, as well as Maʿdin al-Nuhas, also in Atrabazund (Trebizond).
The most direct route to al-Qustantlniyya is through this region, and because of this we have described it in it. The frontier town of this region was Malatya and its communities, but the enemy has laid them waste.
Distances Along the High Roads In This Region From Mosul to Mar Juhayna or to Balad or to al-Mahlabiyya or to MazariʿJ in every case one stage:
p. 149 Then from Marjuhayna to al-Hadltha one stage; thence to al-Buqayʿa one stage;
126 THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS thence to al-Sinn one stage; from Balad to BarqaʿId one stage; thence to Adhrama one stage; thence to al-Munisa one stage; thence to al-Nasibin one stage; thence to Dara one stage.
Then from al-Mahlabiyya to al-Shahhajiyya one stage; thence to Tall Aʿfar one stage; thence to Sinjar one stage.
Then from MazariʿI to Maʿlathaya one stage; thence to al-Hasaniyya one stage; thence to Thamanin one stage; thence to Jazlrat Ibn ʿUmar one stage; thence to Tall Fafan one stage.
From Mosul to Shahrazur sixty farsakhs.
From Amid to Mayyafariqln one stage; thence to Arzan one stage; thence to Masjid Uways one stage; thence to al-Maʿdin one stage; thence to Bidlis one stage.
From Amid to Shimshat one stage; thence to Tall Hom one stage; thence to Jarnan one stage; thence to Bamaqra one stage; thence to Jullab one stage; thence to al-Ruha two barids; thence to Harran the same; thence to Bajarwan one stage; thence to al-Raqqa half a stage.
From al-Rahba to Qarqisiya one stage; thence to al-Daliya or to Blra one stage. p. iso From Qarqisiya to Fudayn one stage; thence to al-Sukayr one stage.
From Amid to Tall Hawr one stage; thence to Malatln one stage;
21ا
THE REGION OF AQUR (AL-JAZIRA)
thence to Tabūs one stage; thence to Shimshat one stage; thence to al-Faʿūniya one stage; thence to Hisn Ziyad one stage; thence to Malatln one stage; thence to ʿArqa one stage; thence to al-Safsaf one stage; thence to al-Rummana one stage; thence to Samandū two stages; thence to Marj Qaysariyya one stage; thence to Anqira four hard stages;
thence to Jasr Shaghir in the country of Ibn al-Malatl three stages;
thence to al-Niqumūdhiyya one stage;
thence to Mal<ab al-Malik (the King's Theatre), one stage;
thence to Harifa one stage;
thence to al-Qustantlniyya one stage.
As desired, one may go from Mayyafariqln to Mūsh four stages; thence to Qunb one stage;
thence to Sinn Nuhas one stage: this is at the crossing ofthe roads of Qallqala,
Malazkird, Mūsh, and al-Khalidat, from which it is distant two stages.
Thence to Samūqamūsh a like distance;
thence to Qalūniyat al-ʿAwfl two stages;
thence to Nafshariya four stages;
thence to Martyrs' Pass [ʿAqabat al-Shuhadaʾ] one stage;
thence to al-Aflaghūniya (Paphlagonia) one stage;
thence to al-Sūnisha one stage;
thence to Namalisa one stage;
thence to Balad Ibn al-Suwanltl one stage;
thence to Dūsaniya one stage;
thence to Bahū-riya(?) one stage;
thence to Qatabūli, where Muslim troops are stationed, one stage; thence toBalad Ibn al-Malatl two stages, and this place provides a hospitable reception for Muslims.
Thence to al-Buhayrat al-Hulwa (the Fresh Water Lake) one stage; thence to Hisn Saʿis one stage.
p. 151
The Region of Al-Sham (S^^ria)
The region of Syria is splendid! Syria the abode of the Prophets, the habitation of the righteous, the home of the successors of the Prophets. It is the destination sought by the upright. It contains the First Qibla [i.e. Jerusalem], the scene of the Day of Resurrection, and of the Night Journey of the Prophet; the Holy Land, caravanserais most excellent, frontier posts most commanding, mountains eminent. Here are the places to which Abraham migrated, also his grave. Here too are the habitations of Job, and his well; the oratory of David, and his gate; the wonders of Solomon, and his cities; the tomb of Isaac and his mother; the birthplace of the Messiah, and his cradle; similarly the village of Tillūt (Saul), and his river; the place ofthe slaying ofJillOt (Goliath), and also his fortress; the cistern ofJeremiah, and his prison; the place of prayer of Uriah, and his house; the dome of Muhammad, and his gate; the Rock of Moses; Rabwa ʿīsil (the hill of Jesus); the oratory of Zakariyyil, and the battleground of John; the shrines of the prophets; the villages of Job, and the habitations of Jacob. The Masjid al-Aqsil (Further Mosque) is there; Jabal Zaytil (Olivet); the city of ʿAkkil; the Shrine of Siddiqi!; the grave of Moses; the resting place of Abraham and his grave; the city of ʿAsqaliln; the spring of Sulwiln (Siloam); the home of Luqmiln (Quran, sora 31, v. 12); the Valley of Kanʿan; the cities of Lot; and the place of the Gardens; ʿUmar's mosques and ʿUthmiln's waqf(endowment); the gate named by the two men (Quran, sora 5, v. 23); also the chamber to which were brought the two disputants (Quran, sura 50, v. 41); the wall that will separate those punished and those pardoned (Quran, sora 57, v. 13); the Near Place [Dome of the Rock]; the Shrine of Baysiln; the gate of Hitta great and glorious; the Gate of al-Sor (the Trumpet); and the Place of Certain Truth; the tombs of both Mary and Rachel; the meeting place ofthe two seas (Quran, sura 18, v. 60), and the dividing place between the two worlds (Quran, sora 57, v. 13); the Gate of al-Saklna (the Divine Presence), and Qubbat al-Silsila (the Dome of the Chain); the station place of the Kaʿba, together with shrines, too numerous to count, and excellences that cannot be hidden; fruits and abundant prosperity, trees and water. This land provides for the needs of this world and the next; for here the heart is cheered and worshippers extend their bodies in prayer. Then of course there is Damascus, the paradise of this earth, and Sughar which is like a miniature Basra; beautiful Ramla, with its white bread, and Iliyil (Jerusalem) p. 1S2 the splendid, without tribulation; Hims is famous for low prices and excellent air; the mountain of Busril with its vineyards should not be forgotten; nor Tiberias, renowned for its crops and its villages.
The [Romaean] sea extends along the west side of this region, with freight coming and going on it constantly; too, the Sea of China [Indian Ocean] touches it on the further side. Here are plains, mountains, low valleys, and other features; and the desert lying on its borders is a corridor from it to Taymil'. Here
129
THE REGION OF AL-SHAM (SYRIA)
are quarries of marble, and the ingredients to compound every medicine. People of wealth, and of commerce, and of refinement, as well as jurisprudents, scribes, artisans, physicians, all live here. However, the people live in dread of the Romaeans, as if they were in a foreign land, for their frontiers have been ravaged, and their border defenses shattered.
Neither are the people here the equals of the Persians in science, religion, and intelligence. Some have apostasized, while others pay tribute, putting obedience to created man before obedience to the Lord of Heaven. The general public is ignorant and churlish, showing no zeal for the holy strife, no rancour towards enemies.
It has been said that Syria has been called al-Sham because it is to the left of the Katha others say it is because one goes to the left, or north, in traveling thither. Others say that it is so called for the beauty spots-like moles on the skin-there, red, white, and black.
The learned of al-ʿIrāq call all the territory that, from their side, is beyond the Euphrates, al-Sham (Syria), and it is in this sense that Muhammad bin al-Hasan uses the term in his works. However, as a matter of fact, none of the land beyond the Euphrates pertains to Syria, excepting the district of Qnnasrln only; the rest is the Desert of the Arabs, and Syria is what lies beyond that again. Of course Muhammad wishes to use the expression only in general terms, and according to accepted usage, just as Khurasan is called al-Mashriq (the East), even though, properly speaking, the East is the territory beyond that again. It can be said that al-Sham is that portion of country opposite to al-Yaman, with al-Hijllz lying between the two. But supposing someone were to say: “There is no denying that the extreme edge of the desert even to the borders of al-ʿIrāq pertains, in fact, to Syria, for this agrees with what the learned of al-ʿIrāq have said," we would reply that we have apportioned the regions and defined the boundaries, and we must not assign to one region what pertains to another. And if someone should say: “What is your authority for saying that it was not part of it in ancient times?" then we should say that jurists and geographers have never disagreed that this land here under dispute pertains to the Peninsula of the Arabs. If anyone considers this area part of Syria, and is not speaking in general terms, we simply say to him that the boundaries of Syria are as we have drawn them, and that this is generally accepted. Moreover, we say, the tract you are adding is in dispute, and on whoever makes the claim for this addition must lie the burden of proof.
We have omitted altogether the description of Tarsūs and its district p. 153 inasmuch as it is in the hands of the Romaeans. However, as for the Cave [of the Seven Sleepers], the city to which it belongs is, in fact, Tarsūs, and here also is the tomb of Daqyllnus. [Decius, Lat. Decianus, Roman Emperor 249-251 C.E.] In its countryside is a hill on which is a mosque, said to be built over the Cave. The jurisprudent Abo ʿAbd Allllh Muhammad bin CUmar al-Bukhllrl has told us a tradition which he received from Abu Talib al-Yamanl, who had it from
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
130
al-Hasan bin Yahya, who had it from his father, who had it from Muhammad bin Sahl al-KhurasanI, who told him that he had attended the lectures of Hisham bin Muhammad, to whom Mujahid bin Yazld related the following: “I went forth with Khalid al-BarIdI [Royal Courier] when he was sent on an embassy to the Romaean despot in the year 102/720; nor was there a third Muslim with us. Having visited Constantinople, we set out to return by ʿAmmuriya, whence after traveling four nights we arrived at Ladhiqiyya al-Muhtariqa [“the Burnt"]. We finally arrived at al-Hawiyya, lying in a depression in the mountains. Here we were told that there were some dead bodies, their identities unknown, but with guards over them.
“The people had us enter an underground passage, some fifty cubits long and two cubits broad. We had lamps with us, and behold, in the middle of the tunnel was an iron door, this being a hiding place for their families during the incursions of the Arabs on them. There were considerable ruins here, in the midst of which was a pit, full of water, about fifteen cubits across, and from here the sky was visible. The cavern from here entered the interior of the mountain, and we were led to a hollow right in the bowels of al-Hawiyya, about twenty cubits in length. Behold, here were thirteen men, lying on their backs, on each one of them a cloak, I know not whether of wool or ofcamel's hair, but they were dust coloured, also a garment, dust coloured, which crackled as crackles the parchment. The face of each one, and the rest of his body, were covered by the garment, which was fringed, on some were boots halfway up the leg, some had sandals, and some had shoes: everything looked new. I uncovered the face ofone of them, and lo, there was the hair of his head, and that of his beard altogether unchanged; the skin of his face was radiant, and the blood in his cheeks evident, as if they had lain down but just a moment before. Their limbs were lithe as the limbs of a living man. All were youths, except for some whom age had turned gray. Now, one had been decapitated, and on an enquiry to some people about it they replied, saying: ‘The Arabs overwhelmed us and took posession of al-Hawiyya. We related the story of these men, but they would not believe us, and one of them struck off the head of this one.'
“The men ofal-Hawiyya further asserted that at the beginning ofeach year, on the feast day devoted to these men, they assemble here and raise the bodies up, man by man, so that they put them into an upright position. Then they wipe them and shake the dust from their clothes, and smooth out their garments, while the bodies do not fall or totter; they just lay them down on the ground again. Moreover, they trim their nails three times a year, for these continue to grow. We then asked for an account ofthese people and their origins, but they declared that they knew absolutely nothing about the matter, saying only: ‘We call them the prophets.' " Mujahid and Khalid themselves are of the opinion that these are the Companions of the Cave-but God knows best.
The form of the region, and representation of it are on the next page. [Map VII]
p. 154
131
THE REGION OF AL-SHAM (SYRIA)
ءر١ال٠د
مقج:ةق
€c^) ;@j ٠٠“
؛ 00
o
٠
ū
Map VII: AI-Sham (see p. 411).
From MS. Sprenger 5-Ahlwardt 6034 by kind permission of the Staatsbibliothek Preussischer Kulturbesitz, Berlin, Orientabteilung.
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
132
We have divided this region into six districts. The first as you go from AqUr (Mesopotamia) is Qnnasrln; then Hims; then Dimashq (Damascus); al-Urdunn (Jordan); Filastln (Palestine); then al-Sharat.
The District of Qnnasrln. Its capital is Halab (Aleppo), and among its cities are Antakiya (Antioch), Balis, al-Suwaydiyya, Sumaysat, Manbij, Bayyas, al-Tinat, Qnnasrln, Marʿash, IskandarUna (Alexandretta), Lajjūn, Rafaniyya, Jusiya, Hamat, Shayzar, Wadi Butnan, Maʿarrat al-Nuʿman, Maʿarrat Qnnasrln.
The District of Hims [Horns, Emesa]. Its capital bears the same name. Among its cities are: Salamiyya, Tadmur (Palmyra), al-Khunasira, Kafartab, al-Ladhiqiyya, Jabala, Antarsūs [Antartūs], Bulunyas, Hisn al-Khawabl.
The District of Dimashq (Damascus). Its capital is of the same name. Its cities are: Baniyas, Sayda (Sidon), BayrUt, Atrabulus (Tripoli), ʿArqa.
The territory of al-Biqaʿ. Chief city, Baʿabakk; towns Kamid, ʿArjamUsh, and al-Zabadani.
The District of Damascus includes six rural territories: al-Ghūta, Hawran, al-Bathaniyya, al-Jawlan, al-Biqaʿ, and al-Hūla.
The District of al-Urdunn. Its capital is Tabariyya (Tiberias). Among its towns are: Qadas, Sūr (Tyre), ʿAkka (Acre), al-LajjOn, Kabul, Baysan, Adhriʿat.
The District of FilastIn (Palestine). Its capital is al-Ramla. Its towns: Bayt al-Maqdis (Jerusalem), Bayt-Jibrll, Ghazza (Gaza), Mimas, ʿAsqalan (Ascalon), Yafa (Jaffa), Arsūf, Qaysariyya, Nabulus, Arlha (Jericho), ʿAmman.
The District of al-Sharat: we consider Sughar its capital. Its chief towns are: Ma'ab (Moab), Muʿan, Tabūk, Adhruh, Wayla, Madyan.
In this region are villages more splendid and larger than many of the chief towns of the Peninsula, such as Darayya, Bayt-Lihya, Kafar Sallam, and Kafar Saba. However, as they have the characteristics of villages they are considered as such; for, as we have said, we use the designations employed in general usage.
Halab is a superb, delightful, fortified city, its inhabitants refined, prosperous, and gifted. The buildings are of stone and in excellent condition. In its midst stands a strong and spacious citadel, with its own water supply; and here also is the ruler's treasury. The great mosque stands in the town. The inhabitants derive their drinking water from the Quwayq River, which enters the town close to the Palace of Sayf-al-Dawla, through an iron grille. Though the town is not large, yet it is the seat of government. The city has seven gates: the Gate of Hims, the Gate of al-Raqqa, the Gate of Qnnasrln, the Gate of the Jews, the Gate of al-ʿIrāq, the Gate of the Watermelon Market (Bab Dar al-Bittlkh), and the Gate of Antakiya. The Gate of the Forty (Bab al-ArbaʿIn) is now closed.
Balis, situated on the extreme point of the boundary towards al-Raqqa is a flourishing place.
Qnnasrln is a town of which the number of the inhabitants has dwindled. The worthy Shaykh Abu Saʿld Ahmad bin Muhammad related to me at Naysabur that he had it from Abū Bakr Muhammad bin Ishaq bin Khuzayma, that he had it from Abu ʿAmmar bin Hurayth al-Marwazl, that he had it from al-Fadhl Abu
p. iss
p. 156
133
THE REGION OF AL-SHAM (SYRIA)
Mūsa, that he had it from ؟sa bin ʿUbayd, that he had it from Ghaylan bin ʿAbd Allah al-ʿAmirl, that he had it from Abo Zurʿa, that he had it from ʿAmr ibn Jarlr, who heard the Prophet-God’s peace and blessings be upon him-say: “God, may He be exalted and glorified, spoke to me in a revelation, saying: ‘At whichever of these three places you alight, that will be the abode of your migration-al-Madlda, Bahrayn, or Qnnasrln’."
Now, ifsomeone should say: “Why have you considered Halab the capital of the district, while here is a town bearing the same name?" I reply to him: “I have already stated that the capitals are compared with generals, and towns with troops. Hence it would not be right that we assign to Halab, with all its eminence, and its being the seat of government and the location of the government offices, or to Antakiya with all its excellence, or to Balis, with its teeming population, the position of towns subordinate to a small and ruined city."
But should he say: “Why have you not employed similar reasoning in the instance of ShIraz, associating with it Istakhr and its towns?" we reply that, as there are some towns around Istakhr at some distance from Istakhr itself, we have deemed it appropriate to deal with the matter just as we did. In fact expediency, in this science of ours, sometimes may supersede the rule, as we have pointed out in questions pertaining to Mukiitib [negotiated enfranchisement of a slave]. Do you not see how postponement of payments by reason of Nayrūz (vernal equinox) and Mihrajan (autumnal equinox), although deemed irregular in other official matters is, nevertheless, admissible in Kitiiba [installments payable on the bond of freedom in the matter of Mukiitib] as a matter of expediency?
Hims-there is not in Syria a larger city than this. A citadel stands high above the town, which you may descry from afar. Most of the drinking water is from rainfall, and there is also a river. When the Muslims conquered this town they took over the church, and made half of it into a mosque. Nearby in the market place is a dome on the summit of which is the figure of a man wrought in brass, standing on a fish which the four winds cause to rotate. About it many stories are told, but not to be believed. This town has suffered violent disorders, and is falling into ruin. The people there are stupid.
The other towns here are also going to ruin. Prices are moderate all over, and those towns on the coast are well fortified.
Tadmur (Palmyra) is in similar condition and it is, as it were, built on an elevated throne. It is one of the cities of Solomon, the son of David. It has a fortress close to the desert, spacious and substantial.
Dimashq (Damascus) is the metropolis of Syria, the royal residence in the days of the House ofUmayya. Here are their palaces, and their monuments. The houses here are of wood and mud-brick. The city is commanded by a fortress, which was being restored while I was there, built of clay. Most of the markets p. 157 are roofed, one of them, running the length of the town, being spacious and well built. It is a town crisscrossed by streams, and encircled by trees. There is an abundance of fruits there, and prices are moderate. Snow is to be had there,
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
134
and every other conceivable kind of thing. No more magnificent hot baths than theirs are to be seen, nor more beautiful fountains, nor more worthy people. Such as I myself know of its gates are: the Jabiya gate, the gate al-Saghlr (Small), the gate al-Kabir (Great), the gate al-Sharqi (Eastern), the gate of Tūma (Thomas), the gate of al-Nahr (the River), the gate of Mahamiliyyin (those who make camel litters).
Though it is indeed a very fine city, yet the air is unpleasantly dry; the people are rowdy, the fruit is insipid, the meat tough, the houses are cramped, the alleys gloomy. The bread is of very poor quality, and a livelihood is difficult to make. The city is about half afarsakh in length and in breadth, and stands on a level plain.
The mosque is easily the finest the Muslims now have, and nowhere among them is a collection of wealth greater than here. Its foundation walls are of squared stones, accurately cut, fitting closely together, and of large size: topping them are splendid battlements. The columns supporting the roof are black polished pillars, in three rows, and set wide apart. In the center, fronting the mihrab, is a great dome. Around the courtyard are lofty arcades set with smaller arches, and the whole area is paved with white marble. The walls, for a height of twelve feet, are faced with a variegated marble, and above this, even to the ceiling, are mosaics of various colours; in the gilded part are representations of trees and towns, together with inscriptions, all of the most remarkable beauty and delicacy and refinement of workmanship. Indeed, few are the kinds of tree, and few the well-known towns that are not represented on these walls. The capitals of the columns are overlaid with gold, and the vaulting above the arcades is everywhere adorned with mosaic. The columns around the court are all of white marble; while the walls that enclose it, the vaulted arcades, and the small arches above are adorned in mosaic with arabesque designs. The roofs are everywhere overlaid with sheets of lead, and the battlements on both sides are faced with mosaic work. To the right in the courtyard is a Treasure House, raised on eight columns; it is finely ornamented and the walls are covered with mosaic. Within the mihrab, and surrounding it, are set carnelian and turquoise stones of the largest size. To the left of this is another mihrab, inferior to it, for the special use of the ruler. The centre of this mihriib had fallen somewhat into decay; but I learn that he has expended on it five hundred dinars, and restored it to its former condition. On the vertex of the cupola is a citron, above that a pomegranate, both in gold. But of the most remarkable of the sights here is the setting of the variegated marbles, every vein matched with the one beside it. Should an artist frequent this place over a year, he might discover every day some new pattern and some fresh design. It is said that al-WalId assembled for its construction skilled artisans from Persia, India, Western Africa, and Byzantium, and spent thereon the revenue of Syria for seven years, together with eighteen shiploads of gold and silver that came from Qubrus (Cyprus); all this is beside what the Emperor of the Romaeans gave him in the matter of materials and mosaics.
p. tss
135
THE REGION OF AL-SHAM (SYRIA)
Addition/version MS. c.
Mosaic work fasiifisii) is a product made from glass in the shape of a two-dirham weight, yellow, dust-coloured, black, red, variegated, and gilded; gold is worked on to the front of the piece, and over that a thin glaze. Plaster is steeped in gum arabic, spread on the wall, and this fasiifisii is set into it. Images, inscriptions, and other patterns are formed in it, all of them gilt; and you perceive the entire wall gilded and sparkling.
The people enter the mosque by four gates. The first, Bab al-Barid [the gate of the postal mail] gives access to the right-hand side [of the courtyard]. It is of great size and has a postern to the right and to the left ofit. Every one of these-the larger gate and the posterns-has double doors covered with plates of gilded copper. Over the main gate and the posterns are three porticoes, and each door opens into an arcade vaulted over, with the arches resting on marble pillars, the walls covered in the way we have already described. All the ceilings are embellished with the most exquisite designs. In these arcades is the place of the secretaries and the court of the deputy of the Qadhi. This gate is between the covered part of the mosque and the courtyard. Opposite to it, on the left-hand side is the second, Bab JayrOn, which is similarly appointed, except that its arcades are vaulted over in the breadth. You ascend to this gate by steps, and here sit astrologers and other such people. The third, Bab al-SaC:.t (the gate of the Hours), is in the eastern angle of the covered part of the mosque: its double doors are without embellishment. Over it are arcades under which are seated the notaries and the like. The fourth gate is the Bab al-Faradis (gate p. 159 of the Gardens), also with double doors. It is opposite the mihrab, and leads into the arcades between the two additions here, on the right and on the left. Above it rises a minaret, recently built and ornamented in the manner already described.
Beside every one of these gates is a pavilion for ablutions, tiled with marble, with closets within which the water runs; and fountains which flow into great basins of marble. From al-Khadhra', the palace of the ruler, are gates leading to the maqsūra, plated with fine sheets of gold.
Now, talking to my father's brother one day said 1: “0 my uncle, surely it was not fitting for al-Walid to expend the resources of the Muslims on the mosque at Damascus. Had he expended as much in building roads, or the water tanks, or in repairing the fortresses, it would have been more proper and more to his credit." Said he: “You simply do not understand, my dear son. Al-Walld was absolutely right, and it was open to him to do a worthy work. For he saw that Syria was a country settled by the Christians, and he noted there their churches so handsome with their enchanting decorations, renowned far and wide, such as are the Qumama, and the churches of Ludd (Lydda) and al-Ruha. So he undertook for the Muslims the building of a mosque that would divert their attention from the churches, and make it one of the wonders of the world. Do you not realize how ʿAbd al-Malik, seeing the greatness of the dome of the Qumama
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
136
and its splendour, fearing lest it should beguile the hearts of the Muslims, hence erected, above the Rock, the dome you now see there?"
Addition/version MS. c.
The people enter the mosque via four doors-Bab JayrOn, Bab alFaradls; Bab al-Barld; Bab al-Sacat. Behind the mosque stands the ruler’s residence, named al-Khadhraʾ, from which doors lead to the maqsUra; all the doors are overlaid with gilded brass. At each door is a basin for the ritual ablution, paved with marble, containing a water fountain which flows over into cisterns of marble. Compartments paved in marble stand by the doors, in every compartment a basin of marble into which water ceaselessly flows. There is, too, in the mosque a spot where an opening is made once every year, so that the mosque is filled with water to the depth of about a cubit, and so the walls and the floor of the mosque are washed. Then another spot is opened so that all the water seeps away through it.
I have found it stated in a book in the library of ʿAdhud al-Dawla that the two brides of the world are Damascus and al-Rayy; and Yahya ibn Aktham says: “There are not on earth more delightful places than these three-the Valley of Samarqand, the Ghūta of Damascus, and the Ubulla Canal."
Damascus was founded by Dimashq, the son of Qanl, the son of Malik, the son of Arfakhshadh, the son of Sam, five years before the birth of Abraham. Al-AsmaʿJ however says rather, that the name is to be derived from the word p. 160 “Damshaqūha", that is, “they hurried it up." It is said that ʿUmar bin ʿAbd al-ʿAzIz wanted to diminish the resources of the mosque and devote the proceeds to the welfare of the Muslims, but they persuaded him to abandon the project. I have read in a book that there was expended on the building of the mosque no less than the value of eighteen mule loads of gold.
A satirist said of the people of Damascus:
0 you who ask concerning our religion!
When you see the splendour of their doctors of the law,
And their mincing walk in public,
Their outward appearance does not reflect their inner secrets.
They have nothing to boast of save a mosque,
And by it have gone beyond their proper limits.
Should a neighbour come to them for a light from their fire In an eternity they would not give him a live coal.
To their neighbours they are lions-but their enemies In security strut haughtily in their homes.
This verse is false, however, because their enemies always go in dread of them.
The city of Baniyas is on the border of al-Hūla, at the foot of the mountain. It is more comfortable and more prosperous than Damascus. Thither have gone most of the people of the frontiers since Tarsūs was taken; it was thus enlarged,
137
THE REGION OF AL-SHAM (SYRIA)
and continues to grow every day. An extremely cold river, emerging from under the Mountain of Snow, gushes forth in the middle of the city. This city is the granary of Damascus. It is bounteous to its inhabitants, lying amidst splendid country districts. It must be said, however, that the drinking water there is bad.
Sayda (Sidon) and Bayrūt are two fortified towns on the coast: so too Atrabulus, (Tripoli), which is, however, greater. Baʿlabakk is an ancient city with remarkable ruins, and farms providing an abundance of grapes. The remaining cities of this province are in good condition, and spacious. In Hawran and al-Bathaniyya are the villages ofJob and his lands: the chief city here is Nawa, a source of abundant wheat and grain. Al-Hūla is a source of cotton and flowers: it is low lying and has many streams. The Ghūta [intensively irrigated, highly productive agricultural area, extending some nine miles towards the east and south of Damascus, to the steppe] is a day's journey across it each way, and is beyond description!
Tabariyya (Tiberias) is the capital of Jordan and a city of Wadi (the Valley of) Kan<an. It is situated between the mountain and the lake, cramped, with suffocating heat in summer, and unhealthy. Its length is about afarsakh) but it has virtually no breadth. Its marketplace extends from one gate to the other, with its cemetery on the hill. There are eight hot baths here needing no fuel, along with numerous basins of hot water. The mosque is large and fine, and stands in the marketplace; its floor is laid in pebbles, and the building rests on pillars of joined stone.
It is said of the people of Tiberias that for two months they dance, for two more months they glut; for two months they flail about, and for two more months they go naked; for two months they pipe, and for two more months they wallow. The explanation of this is that they dance from the number of fleas, then glut themselves with the lotus fruit; they slap about at the hornets with fly-swatters, to drive them from their meat and fruits; then they go naked from the intense heat; they suck the sugarcane; and then they must wade through their muddy streets. Beyond the lower end of the lake is a great bridge over which goes the road to Damascus. The drinking water is from the lake. All around the lake are villages and palm trees, and on its surface boats pass to and fro. Water from the baths and the hot springs flows into the lake so that its water is distasteful to strangers. Still the water teems with fish, and is easy to digest. The towering mountain overhangs the town.
Qadas is a small town at the foot of a hill, and is a place of plenty. The district of the town is Jabal cA. mila. Here are three springs from which the people drink, and they have one bath situated below the town. The mosque is in the market, and beside it is a palm tree. The place is scorching. A lake lies about a farsakh away, and the waters debouch into the Lake of Tiberias. Across the river a dam of remarkable construction has been raised, so the water has gathered to form the lake. Along the shore are thickets of the halfaʾ reed, which provides the people their livelihood, for very many of them weave mats and twist ropes therefrom.
p. 161
p. 162
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
138
In the lake are many kinds of fish including the bunni (a carp), brought here from Wllsit. Many free non-Muslim subjects live here.
Jabal ʿAmila has a number of delightful villages, and produces grapes and other fruits, olives, and plums. The rainfall waters their farms. The district overhangs the sea, and adjoins the mountain of Lebanon.
Addition/version MS. c.
All the area has important villages, growing olives and grapes. Below Qadas is a
small lake beside which is a great stand of esparto, and all this is of much benefit
to them: most of the inhabitants weave mats, plait ropes, and fish.
Adhricat is a city close to the desert. It pertains to the country district ofJabal Jarash, which lies opposite to Jabal ʿAmila. There are many villages here; and Tiberias has flourished because of these two districts called Jabal'.
Bayslln lies on the river. It abounds in palm trees, and supplies the rice of Palestine and Jordan. Water is abundant everywhere, but it is rather difficult of digestion; [the stream cuts through the town. The mosque stands in the marketplace, and many men of piety live here.-MS. C].
Al-LajjOn is a city at the start of the frontier of Palestine, in mountain country. Running water is found here; and it is a spacious and delightful place.
Kabul is a coastal town. Here are farms of sugarcane, and here is refined sugar the most excellent.
Al-Farlldhiya is a large village having a pulpit in the mosque. Grapes are abundant here, and vineyards. Here water is plentiful, the site delightful.
ʿAkkll (Acre) is a fortified city on the sea; its mosque is very large, having a grove of olive trees in its court, providing sufficient oil for the lamps, with some to spare. It had not been so well fortified as it is now until Ibn TūlOn visited it. He had seen Tyre, with its fortifications, and the encirclement with walls of p. 163 its harbour: he wished to construct a like harbour at ʿAkkll. Accordingly, he convened the craftsmen of the province and laid the matter before them; but it was allowed that nobody then knew how to set a construction in water. Thereupon, mention was made to him of my grandfather, AbO Bakr, the architect, and it was asserted that ifanyone should have the requisite knowledge, then it should be he. So Ibn TOlOn wrote to his deputy in Jerusalem to have him send my grandfather to him: he arrived, and the matter was laid before him. Said my grandfather: “This is an easy matter; bring me split trunks of sycamore that are sturdy." He lined up the beams on the surface of the water according to the plan ofa land fortress, and bound them one to the other; he left, however, a large opening towards the west. Upon these beams he raised a structure of stones and mortar; and whenever he had laid five courses of stone he would tie them to sturdy pillars, to strengthen the construction. As the beams became more and more weighted they began to sink; and eventually knowing they were resting on the sand, he left them there a full year so they would set solidly. Then he recommenced building from where he had left off; and as the structure reached
139
THE REGION OF AL-SHAM (SYRIA)
the old wall he bonded both together and joined the beams. Over the opening he built a bridge, so that the ships every night enter the port and a chain is drawn across, just as at Tyre. It is said that my grandfather was paid for this work the sum of one thousand dinars, besides robes of honour, riding animals, and other considerations, and that his name was inscribed on the work. Before that time the enemy used to make raids on the ships here.
Al-Jashsh is a village close in size to a capital city. It is in the centre of four rural districts close to the sea.
Sūr (Tyre) is a fortified town on the sea, or rather in the sea. It is entered through one gate only, over a single causeway, and the sea is around it. The other portion is enclosed by three walls which rise out of the sea; the ships enter the harbour every night, and a chain is drawn across. All this is as described by Muhammad bin al-Hasan in his Kitiib al-Ikrah (Treatise on Constraints). Water is brought to the town by an overhead aqueduct. Tyre is really a beautiful and delightful city. Many things are produced there, including specialties. Between Acre and Tyre is a sort of inlet of the sea, hence the saying: “Acre face-to-face with Tyre is found, but you still have to go the way around," that is, around the water.
Al-Ramla is the capital of Palestine. It is a delightful and well-built city. The water is good to drink and flows freely; fruits are abundant, and of every possible kind. It is situated in the midst of fertile rural areas, splendid cities, holy places, and pleasant villages. Trade here is profitable, and the means of livelihood easy. There is not in Islilm a more splendid mosque than that here, no more delicious or excellent than its white bread. No lands more favoured, no fruits more delicious! It is situated in a productive countryside, with walled towns and pleasant suburbs. It possesses elegant hostelries and pleasant baths; superb food, and condiments in abundance; spacious houses, fine mosques, and broad streets. It is highly advantaged, being on a plain, yet near to mountain and sea. It has both fig trees and palms; its fields yield without irrigation-in fact it has many advantages and excellences. However, in the winter the place is a slough of mud; in summer a crater of powdery sand: no water flows nor is there anything green; the soil is not moist, nor is there snow. Fleas are everywhere. The wells are deep and salty, and the rainwater is held in closed cisterns; hence the poor go thirsty, and strangers are helpless and at a loss what to do. In the baths a fee must be paid so that the attendants will turn the water wheels. The city is a mile square, and its houses are of finely quarried stone and baked brick. Such as I know of its gates are: the Darb Biʾr aJ-ʿAskar (Gate of the Soldiers' Well), the Gate of the ʿAnnaba Mosque, the Gate of Jerusalem, the Gate of Baylaʿa, Darb Ludd (the Lydda Gate), Darb Yafa (the Jaffa Gate), Darb Misr (the Egyptian Gate), and the Dajūn Gate. Close by is a town named Dajūn, with its mosque. The chief mosque of al-Ramla is in the market, more magnificent, more elegant than the mosque of Damascus. It is called al-Abyadh (the White Mosque), and in all Islam there is found no larger mihrab than that here, and
p. 164
p. 165
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
140
after the pulpit in Jerusalem there is no more beautiful pulpit than the one here; it also possesses a splendid minaret. The mosque was built by Hisham bin ʿAbd al-Malik. I have heard my uncle say that when the khalif was about to build the mosque, it was reported to him that the Christians possessed columns of marble, then buried beneath the sand, which they had prepared for the church of Bali<a. Thereupon, Hisham bin ʿAbd al-Malik informed the Christians that they must either reveal them to him, or he would demolish the church at Lydda, so as to build this mosque using its columns. They revealed the columns to him, and they are, indeed, rugged, and tall, and beautiful. The floor of the covered area of the mosque is paved with marble, and the courtyard paved with stone tightly fitted together. The gates of the covered part are made of cypress wood and cedar, sculpted in relief, and very beautiful in appearance.
Bayt al-Maqdis (Jerusalemfthere is not among the towns of the provinces one bigger than it; and indeed many capitals are smaller, for example, Istakhr, and Qayin, and al-Farama. The cold here is not extreme, neither is the heat, and snow falls but rarely.
The Qadhl Abu al-Qasim, son of the Qadhl of the two Holy Cities, enquired of me concerning the climate in Jerusalem. “Moderate," said I, “neither hot nor cold in excess." “That," said he, “is the very description of Paradise." The buildings are of stone, and you will not find finer or more solid construction anywhere. There is no more virtuous populace than that here, no better living conditions, no cleaner markets than theirs. Its mosque is of the largest, and nowhere are Holy Places more numerous. Its grapes are first-rate, and its quinces nonpareil. In Jerusalem are all manner of illuminati and physicians, and the hearts of the wise ever yearn towards it. Never for a day are its streets empty of strangers.
Now it happened that one day in al-Basra I sat in the assembly of al-Qadhl al-Mukhtar Abo Yahya Ibn Bahram, and the conversation turned on the city of Cairo and others, and it was asked of me what town is the most sublime. Said I, “My own native town." I was asked, “Which is the most delightful?" “My own," said I. It was asked, “Which is the most excellent?" “Mine," said I. It was asked, “Which is the most beautiful?" “My own city," said I. It was asked, “And which is most abundant in good things?" “My city," said I. It was asked, “Which is the most spacious?" “Mine," said I. The assembly were astonished at that and said to me, “You are a learned man, but you pretend to more than can be conceded to you. You may be likened only to the owner of the she-camel in his conversation with al-Hajjaj. He, however, came with his proofl" Said 1: “Now, as to my saying that Jerusalem is the most sublime of cities, it is because it unites in itself the advantages of this world and of the next. He who is of the sons of this world and yet yearns after the things of the next, finds their market here; and he who would be of the children of the next world, and yet desire the amenities of this world, he finds them here also. Consider the pleasantness of the climate: the cold there does not injure, nor does the heat afflict. As to its being the finest city,
p. 166
141
THE REGION OF AL-SHAM (SYRIA)
nowhere are to be seen finer buildings, or cleaner than those there, or a mosque more beautiful. As for its being the most abundant in good things, God-may He be exalted-has gathered together there all the fruits of the lowlands, of the plains, and of the hill country, and of every conceivable kind, such as the citron, the almond, the date, the nut, the fig, and the banana, besides milk in plenty, and honey and sugar. As for the excellence of the city, is it not indeed to be the plain of the Resurrection, and the marshalling place on the day of judgment for the risen dead? Now it is true that Makka and al-Madlna are in the ascendant with the Kaʿba and the Prophet-God’s peace and blessings be upon him-but truly, on the Day of Resurrection, they will both hasten to Jerusalem, and the excellence of all of them will be encompassed there together. As to its being the most spacious of cities, since all creation is to be assembled there, what place on earth is more extensive than it?" The company were delighted with what I said, and agreed with the truth of it.
However, Jerusalem has a number of disadvantages. Thus, it is said that it is written in the Torah: “Jerusalem is a golden basin filled with scorpions." You will not find any more filthy than its baths, any more highly priced provisions. Few are the learned there, many are the Christians, and these make themselves distasteful in the public places. In the hostelries taxes are heavy on anything that is sold, for there are guards at every gate, so it is not possible for anyone to sell anything on which one might make a profit, except in these places, and then with little gain. The oppressed here have no protectors; the blameless are aggrieved, the rich envied. The jurisprudent is in solitude, and the man of letters disregarded; schools are unattended, and there is no instruction. The Christians and the Jews are predominant here, and the mosque devoid of congregations and assemblies.
Jerusalem is smaller than Makka and larger than al-Madlna. Over the city is a castle, one side of which is against the hillside, the other defended by a fosse. The city has eight iron gates: Bilb Sihyawn (of Sion); Bilb al-Tih (of the Wilderness); Bilb al-Ballilt (of the Palace); Bilb Jubb Irmiyil (ofJeremiah's Well); Bilb Sulwiln (of Siloam); Bilb Arlhil (ofJericho); Bilb al-ʿAmūd (of the Column); Bilb Mihrilb DilwOd (of David's Oratory).
There is water in Jerusalem in abundance. Hence there is a saying that “there is no place in Jerusalem but where one may get water, and hear the call to prayer." Indeed, few are the houses in which there are not one or more cisterns.
Within the city are three great tanks: Birkat Bani Isrilʾll, Birkat Sulaymiln, and Birkat ʿlyildh, and close by are their baths. The water channels ofthe streets lead to the tanks. In the area of the mosque are twenty underground capacious cisterns, and there is hardly any quarter of the city without a public drinking fountain, even if the water is what drains from the streets. At a valley some six miles from the city two pools have been made, into which flow the torrents of the winter rains. Leading from these two pools, channels to the city carry water to the town in springtime so as to fill the cisterns in the mosque, and those in other places.
p. 167
p. 168
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
142
The Masjid al-Aqsa (the Further Mosque) lies at the southeastern corner of the city. Its foundations were laid by David, the length of each stone being ten cubits or less. They are carefully draughted and faced, fitted well together, and are of the hardest material. On these ʿAbd al-Malik built, using small but well-shaped stones, and crenellated it. This mosque was even more beautiful than that of Damascus.
Addition/version MS. c .
. . . because it had to stand comparison with the great church belonging to the Christians, which was in Jerusalem; so they built the mosque more magnificent than that.
However, an earthquake occurred in the time of the ʿAbbasids that threw down the covered portion, except the part around the mihrab. When news of this reached the khalif, he was told that not even everything in the treasury of the Muslims would suffice to restore it to its former state. Accordingly, he wrote to the governors of the provinces, and to other commanders, that each one of them should undertake to build a colonnade. So they built it firmer though less elegant in structure than it had been before. That older portion remained, even like a beauty spot amid the new, and it extends as far as the limit of the marble columns. What extends beyond the concrete columns is the new portion.
The covered portion of the mosque has twenty-six doors, and that opposite the mihrab is called Bab al-Nahas al-Aʿdham (the Great Brazen Gate). It is p. 169 overlaid with gilded brass, and only a man strong of shoulder and powerful of arm can move a leaf of it. To the right of this are seven large doors, the center one overlaid with gilt plates-and it is the same to the left. On the east side are eleven doors, unornamented. Over the fifteen doors mentioned above is a portico supported on marble columns, built at the instigation of ʿAbd Allah bin Tahir. In the courtyard of the mosque, on the right-hand side are porticoes supported on marble columns and pillars; on the further side are chambers arched in stone. Over the center of the covered portion of the mosque is a great peaked roof behind a magnificent dome. The ceilings everywhere, except on the further side, are covered with sheets of lead, those on the further side being regularly patterned with large mosaics.
The entire court is paved. In its center stands a platform, as in the mosque at Yathrib (al-Madlna), to which ascend from the four sides wide flights of steps. On the platform stand four domes-the Dome of the Chain, Qubbat al-Miʿraj (the Dome of the Ascent), and Qubbat al-Nabl (the Dome of the Prophet)-God's peace and blessings be upon him; these three are small, sheathed in lead, and stand on marble columns, being without walls. And in the center stands Qubbat al-Sakhra (the Dome of the Rock), rising over an octagonal building with four gates, each gate facing one each of the flights of steps. These are the Qbla (Southern) Gate, the Gate of Israfil, the Gate al-Sūr (of the Trumpet), and the Gate of al-Nisaʾ (the Women), which last opens toward the west. All ofthem are
143
THE REGION OF AL-SHAM (SYRIA)
decorated with gold, and closing each one of them is a handsome door of cedar wood, worked in fine bas-relief: these were made at the command of the mother of al-Muqtadir Billilh. At each gate is a vestibule of marble and cedar-wood, to which brass is fitted on the outside; and at these gates are doors also, but they are unornamented. Within the building are three concentric colonnades with columns of polished marble of incomparable splendour and magnificence, and over these a low vaulting. Within these again is another gallery over the Rock-circular and not octagonal, however-with polished pillars supporting round arches. Built above these is the drum of the Dome rising high in the air, with large openings in it: above this, the Dome. The Dome from its great base, and including its pinnacle which rises into the air, is in height a hundred cubits, and may be seen from afar. Atop it is the beautiful pinnacle with a height of that of a man, plus a cubit. The Dome, for all its great size, is entirely covered with plates of gilded brass, while the floor of the building itself, together with its walls, and the drum, from within and without, are ornamented with marble and mosaic, such as we have already described in our account of the mosque at Damascus. The cupola of the Dome is of three sections: the inner one is of ornamental panels, the second is of iron girders made into a truss, done so that the wind may not cause it to sway; and the third is of wood and on these are fixed the outer plates. Through the middle of the cupola is a means of access to the pinnacle by which a workman may ascend to inspect or repair it. As soon as the beams of the sun strike the cupola, and the drum radiates the light, then indeed is this marvelous to behold; in short, I have never seen in all Islilm the like of it; nor have I ever heard that in all the realm of the idolaters is the like of this dome to be found. The mosque is entered through thirteen openings, closed by twenty gates: Bilb Hitta (the Gate oflndulgence), the two Gates of the Prophet-God’s peace and blessings be upon him-the Gates of Mihrilb Maryam (Mary's Oratory), the two Gates al-Rahma (of Mercy), the Gate of the Birka (Pool) of Bani Isrilʿil, the Gates al-Asbilt (of the Tribes), the Gates of the Hilshimites, the Gate of al-Walld, the Gate of Ibrilhlm (Abraham), the Gate of Umm Khiilid (the Mother of Khillid), and the Gate of Dilwnd (David).
Of the holy places within the Mosque are the Mihrilb Maryam (Oratory of Mary), Zakariyyilʾ, Yaʿqūb (ofJacob), and al-Khidhr; the Station of the Prophet, and ofJibriiʾll (Gabriel), the Place ofthe Ants, and ofthe Light, and ofthe Kaʿba, also of al-Sirilt [Bridge over the fire of hell]. These shrines are scattered over the sacred area.
On the north side are no colonnades. The roofed building of the mosque does not extend to the eastern wall, hence it has been said “The queue of worshippers will not be complete here ever." Why this portion was left uncompleted two reasons are given. One is that CUmar commanded the people, “Build in the western part of this mosque a place of prayer for Muslims," so they left this portion unoccupied so as not to go counter to his injunction. The other reason given is that if they had extended the main building to the comer,
P. 170
p. 171
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
144
the Rock would not lie opposite the mihriib, and this was repugnant to them. But God knows best.
The length of the mosque is a thousand cubits, using the Hashimite cubit, and its width is seven hundred. In its ceilings are four thousand wooden beams, seven hundred marble columns. On the roof are forty-five thousand sheets of lead. The dimensions of the Rock itself are thirty-three cubits by twenty-seven, and the cavern which is beneath it will hold sixty-nine persons. Its endowment provides monthly for one hundred qists [one qist equals two and one-tenth liters, approximately], of olive oil, and in the year they use eight hundred thousand cubits of matting. The attendants of the mosque are assigned to it, solely. Their service was established by ʿAbd al-Malik from the Imperial Fifth ofthe Prisoners of War, so they are called al-Akhmas (the Quintans). No one besides these may serve, and they take their vigil in turn.
Sulwan (Siloam) is a place on the outskirts of the city. Below the village is a spring with water of moderate quality which irrigates the large gardens bequeathed by ClJthman bin ʿAffan for the poor of the city. Lower down again is Biʾr Ayyub (Job's Well), and it is said that the water of Zamzam visits the water of this well on the Night of ʿArafa [ninth day of the month of the Pilgrimage].
Wadi Jahannam runs from the angle of the sanctuary area to its furthest point, along the eastern side. In the wadi are gardens and vineyards, churches, caverns, chapels, tombs, and other remarkable features, also cultivated fields. In its midst stands a church over the sepulchre of Mary, and overlooking the p. 172 valley are tombs, among them those of Shaddad bin Aws al-Khazrajl, and ClJbada bin al-Samit.
Jabal Zayta (the Mount of Olives) overlooks the mosque from the east side of this valley. On its summit is a mosque built in memory of CUmar, who stayed here for some days at the capitulation ofthe city. There is, too, a church here on the spot from which Jesus-peace be on him-ascended; also a place that is called al-Sahira (the Plain); and I have been informed on the authority of Ibn ʿAbbas that al-Sahira will be the scene of the resurrection. The ground is pure, never has blood been spilled on it.
Bayt Lahm (Bethlehem) is a village about afarsakh away, in the direction of Hebron. Jesus was born here, and here was the Palm Tree (Qur'>ūn, sora 19, v. 23). Palms do not produce ripe dates in this district, but this happened by a miracle. Here also is a church, incomparable in the country around.
Habra (Hebron) is the village of Abraham al-Khalll (the Friend of God}-on him be peace. Within it is a strong fortress said to be of the building of the jinns, being of enormous squared stones. In the middle of this stands a dome of stone, built in Islamic times, over the sepulchre of Abraham. The tomb of Isaac lies forward, in the main building of the mosque, the tomb of Jacob to the rear; facing each prophet lies his wife. The enclosure has been converted into a mosque, and built round about it are rest houses for the pilgrims, so that they adjoin the main edifice on all sides. A small water conduit has been conducted to
145
THE REGION OF AL-SHAM (SYRIA)
them. All the countryside around this town for about half a stage has villages in every direction, with vineyards and grounds producing grapes; and apples called Jabal Nadhra, the likes of which are not to be seen, being fruit of unsurpassed excellence. Sometimes here, apples of good quality will sell at a thousand for a dirham, and indeed one apple alone may weigh one hundred dirhams. Much of this fruit is dried, and sent to Egypt.
In Hebron is a public guest house continuously open, with a cook, a baker, and servants in regular attendance. These offcr a dish of lentils and olive oil to every poor person who arrives, and it is set before the rich, too, should they wish to partake. Most men express the opinion this is a continuation of the guest house ofAbraham; however it is, in fact, from the bequest ofTamim al-Dilrl and others. In any case, it were better, to my mind, to avoid this guest house. Addition/version MS. c .
Now, the Amir of Khurilsiln-may God, most exalted, confirm his dominion-had assigned to this charity one thousand dirhams yearly; moreover, al-Shilr al-ʿĀdil bestowed on it a substantial bequest. At the present time I do not know in all the real of al-Islilm any house of hospitality and charity more excellent than this one; for the hungry, and the wayfarers may have the best food here, and you find continued here the custom of Abraham; for he delighted during his lifetime in the giving of hospitality, and God-—ay He bo exaltedhas caused the custom to be kept going after his death.
Afarsakh distant from Hebron is a small mountain overlooking the Lake of Sughar (Dead Sea) and the site of the cities ofLot. Here stands a mosque which Abn Bakr al-Sabilhl built; within it is the resting place of Abraham-peaea be upon him-which has sunk below the surface of the dry ground about a cubit. It is related that when Abraham saw the cities of Lot in the air he fell prostrate there and said: “I now bear witness that this is in truth the time of Certainty [of death]." (See Quriin, sora 74, v. 43-48 and sora 15, v. 99).
The limit of the Holy City extends over the area around Jerusalem for forty miles, including the capital and dependent towns, twelve miles of the seashore, towns Sughar and Maʾilb, and five miles of desert. To the south it extends to beyond al-Kusayff and the land parallel to this. To the north it reaches the limits of Nilbulus. This land is “blessed," as God-may he be exalted-has declared; the hills are covered with trees, the plains are cultivated, needing neither irrigation nor the watering of rivers. As the two men reported to Moses the son of ʿlmriln: “We came on a land flowing with milk and honey." Addition/version MS. c.
At times I myself have seen in Jerusalem cheese selling at one danaq [a sixth of a dirham] for a rat/, and sugar for a dirham per rat/, and for the same price one and one half rat/s of olive oil, or four rat/s of raisins.
Bayt JibrIl is a city partly in the plain and partly in the hill country. Its rural district is called al-Dilrnm, and here are marble quarries. It is the granary
p. 173
p. 174
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
146
of the capital, the storehouse for the district. It is a country of fruitfulness and abundance, with very fine estates. The population has, however, decreased in number, effeminacy is rife.
Ghazza (Gaza) is a large town on the main road to Egypt, and on the edge of the desert, yet close to the sea. There is here a beautiful mosque, also the monument of CUmar bin al-Khattab. It is, too, the birth place of al-Shafiʿi, and has the tomb of Hashim bin ʿAbd Manaf.
Mlmas, on the sea, is a small fortified town pertaining to Gaza.
ʿAsqalan (Ascalon), on the sea, is a fine city strongly garrisoned. Fruit is abundant here, especially that of the sycamore tree. Its mosque stands in the Market of the Clothmerchants, and is paved with marble. It is a delightful, favoured, excellent, and well-fortified town. Its silk is renowned, its products are plentiful, and life there is delightful. Its markets are attractive, and the guardhouses are excellent. Yet, its harbour is unsafe, its water of middling quality, and its dalam (sand tick), noxious.
Yafa (Jaffa) situated on the sea, is a small town, even though it is the entrepot of Palestine and the port of al-Ramla. It is protected by a strong fortress, having gates covered with iron plate. The sea gate is wholly ofiron. The mosque overlooks the sea, a pleasure to behold; the harbour is superb.
Arsuf is smaller than Yafa, well fortified and populous. There is here a beautiful pulpit made in the first instance for al-Ramla, but being too small, taken to Arsuf.
Qaysariyya (Caesareafahere is not on the Romaean Sea a city more beautiful or with more bounty. It is a wellspring of prosperity, and useful products gush from it. The soil is excellent, the fruits delicious,
Addition/version MS. c.
. .. and the town is also a source of buffalo milk and white bread.
An impregnable fortress guards it, and well-populated suburbs are protected by the fortress. The drinking water of the inhabitants is from wells and cisterns. It has a beautiful mosque.
Nabulus is situated in the mountains. It has an abundance of olive trees, and it is even called “Little Damascus." It lies in a valley, shut in between two mountains. Its marketplace extends from gate to gate, and another to the centre of the town, while the mosque is in the midst of the town. The town is paved and clean, with a stream of running water through it; the buildings are of stone, and some remarkable mills may be seen here.
Arlha (Jericho): this is the City of the Giants, and herein is the gate of which God spoke to the Children of Israel (Quran, sora 5, v. 23). It is an abundant source of indigo and has many palms. Its rural district is the Ghawr, where the fields are watered from the springs. The heat here is excessive, snakes and scorpions are numerous.
p. 17s
147
THE REGION OF AL-SHAM (SYRIA)
Addition/version MS. c.
This city is also the home of the theriacal serpents, and the excellence of the
theriac ofJerusalem is owing to the use therein of the flesh of those serpents.
The people are tan and swarthy, and fleas abound. Even so, the water is the lightest on the digestion you will find in Islam; bananas are plentiful, as are fresh dates, and fragrant plants.
ʿAmman, situated on the edge of the desert, has around it many villages and cultivated fields. Its rural district is al-Balqaʾ, rich in grain and flocks. Many streams flow through the town, on which are mills which the water turns. It has a fine mosque beside the marketplace, its courtyard tiled with mosaic. As we have remarked before, this town somewhat resembles Makka. The Castle of Goliath is on a hill overhanging the city. In the city is the tomb of Uriah, over which stands a mosque. Here also is the stadium of Solomon. Living costs are low, fruit is plentiful. On the other hand, the people there are uneducated, the roads thither difficult.
Al-Raqim is a village lying about afarsakh from ʿAmman, and on the border of the desert. In it is a cavern with two entrances, one small, one large: they say that anyone who enters by the larger is unable to leave by the smaller, without his having a guide. In the cavern are three tombs, concerning which Abu al-Fadhl Muhammad bin Mansnr related to me the following tradition, having had it from Abn Bakr bin Saʿid, who had it from al-Fadhl bin Hammad, who had it from Ibn Abi Maryam, who had it from Ismaʿil bin Ibrahim bin ʿUqba, who had it from Nafiʿ, who had it from ʿAbd Allah ibn ʿUmar, who had it from the Messenger of God himself-God's peace and blessings be upon him! It seems that once, while a party of three men were walking, the rain overtook them, and compelled them to a cave in the mountain. But a boulder fell down from the mountain, blocking the mouth of their cave, and they were shut in. Then said one of them to the others: “Direct your attention to God-may He be exalted and glorified--o such good deeds as you have done, and beseech God that therefor perchance He will split open the boulder." Said one of them: “0 God, do I not have my parents, venerable and advanced in years, and my little children besides? And I used to pasture sheep to provide for them, and when I would return to them and milk the ewes, would give of the milk to my parents p. 176 to drink even before giving to my children. However, forced labour detained me one day, so I did not arrive until late in the evening, and behold my parents were sleeping. I did the milking as usual, and brought of the milk, and stood close to their heads, yet dreading lest I should awaken them from their sleep, while at the same time loth to give of it to the children before them, though they were sorely in need of it. Thus I remained until break of dawn. Since Thou knowest I did this to find favor before Thee, do Thou burst open a gap for us through which we may see the sky." So God-may He be exalted-rent open a gap for them through which they saw the sky.
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
148
Then said the second one: “0 God, was there not the daughter of my uncle whom I loved as passionately as man can? And whenever I sought to possess her, she would refuse herself to me, saying I should bring her a hundred dinars. So I strove until I collected the hundred dinars, and brought them to her. But as I lay down between her legs she called out: ‘0 servant of God, fear God; and break not the seal except in lawfulness.' So I rose up from her. Now Thou knowest that I did that to find favor before Thee, so do Thou open further a gap for us." So God opened the gap further for them.
Said the third, “0 God, I hired a serving man for the customary portion of rice, and when his work was finished said he: ‘Give me my due.' So I presented to him his due, but he would not accept it, and spurned it. However, I continued to use it for sowing until I acquired from its produce cattle and a herdsman. He eventually came to me and said, “Fear God, and oppress me not, but give me my due." So I replied: “Go. thou to those cattle and their herdsman and receive them." Said he: ‘Fear God and mock me not.' Said I: ‘I do not mock thee; take thou those cattle and their herd.' So he took them and went his way. And as Thou knowest I did that to find favour in Thine eyes; so do Thou split what remains of the rock." And God opened up the way before them.
In this district are large villages possessed of their own mosques, and these are more populous and more flourishing than most of the cities of the Arabian Peninsula. They are well-known places; however, since they have not attained the influence of cities or their splendour, nor are they of the insignificance of villages in their obscurity, but rather wavering in degree, as it were, between the two, it is incumbent on us to mention them specifically and describe their situations. Among these are: Ludd (Lydda), which lies about a mile from al-Ramla. There is here a great mosque wherein large numbers of people assemble from the capital, and from the villages around. Here too is a remarkable church, at the door of which Jesus will slay the Antichrist.
Kafar Saba, a large place, with a mosque, and on the main road to Damascus.
ʿĀqir, a large village possessing a fine mosque. The people here are given to good works. Their bread is incomparable. It is on the main road to Makka.
Yubna with its beautiful mosque: this is the source of the excellent fig known as “the Damascene."
ʿAmawas (Emmaus) is said to have been the capital in olden times; however, p. 177 the population moved towards the low-lying land, and towards the sea, on account of the wells, because these are on the edge of the hill country.
Kafar Sallam is one of the villages of Caesarea; it is large, well populated, and has a mosque. It lies on the high road.
This capital has ribat (watch stations) along the sea coast where the men under arms assemble. The warships and the galleys of the Romaeans pull into them, bringing with them captives taken from the Muslims, for ransom at the rate of three for one hundred dinars. At each of these stations are men who know their language, since they have missions to them, and trade with them in
149
THE REGION OF AL-SHAM (SYRIA)
provisions of all kinds. The alarm is sounded when the Romaean ships come into sight: ifit be night a beacon is lighted at the station, and ifit be by day they make a smoke. From each coastal station to the capital is a series of lofty towers in each of which is stationed a company of men. As soon as the beacon is lighted at the coastal station, it is then done at the next one, and then in turn at the others, so that it is scarcely an hour before the capital is under levy. Drums are beaten at the tower calling people to their respective watch stations. They move out in force, under arms, and the young men of the countryside assemble. Then the ransoming begins. They will exchange man for man, or offcr money or jewelry until they ransom all the captives that have been brought. The watch stations in this district at which the ransoming occurs are: Ghazza, MImas, ʿAsqalan, Mahuz-(the Port of)Azdnd, Mahuz- (the Port of) Yubna, Yafa, and Arsuf.
Sughar-the people of the two neighbouring districts call it Saqar (“Hell"); and a Jerusalemite here once addressed a letter to his friends from “Saqar al-Sufla (‘Lower Hell') to the Upper Paradise." And indeed this is a country that is deadly to strangers, for the water here is vile; and he for whom the Angel of Death falters, let him travel thither, for I do not know in Islam a place like it in this respect. Indeed I have seen plague-ridden countries, but none the like of this. The people are swarthy and stocky. The waters are hot as hellfire. It is nevertheless a little Basra, and trade there is lucrative. The town stands on the shore of the Overturned Lake (Dead Sea), and is the remnant of the cities ofLot, being spared only because the inhabitants knew nothing of the abominations. The mountains rise up close by.
Maʾab lies in the mountains. It has many villages, producing almonds and grapes. It is close to the desert. Muʾta is one of its villages, where is the tomb of Jaʿfar al-Tayyar, also that of ʿAbd Allah bin Rawaha.
Adhruh is an outlying town on the borders of al-Hijaz and Syria. They keep here the mantle of the Messenger of God-God’s peace and blessings be upon him-and a treaty from him written on parchment.
Wayla is a town on the edge of a branch of the Sea of China. It is a well-populated and beautiful city, producing palms and fish. It is the port of Palestine, and the entrepot of al-Hijaz. The general populace call it, “Ayla", but in fact Ayla, now in ruins, is close by here. This is the place of which God-may He be exalted-said: “ask them of the township that was by the sea." (Qu^ān, sura 7, v. 163).
Madyan is in fact within the borders ofal-Hijaz, because the Peninsula ofthe Arabs includes all that is encircled by the sea, and Madyan is in this tract. Here is the rock which Moses-peace be upon him-removed when he gave water to the flocks of Shuʿayb. Water is here abundant. The weights and measures of this town, and their manners and customs, are those of Syria. About Wayla, the people of Syria, and those of al-Hijaz, and the Egyptians, dispute among themselves as to which province it belongs-just as is the case with regard to ʿAbbadan-but its inclusion in Syria is more reasonable, because the customs of
p. 178
p. 179
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
150
the people and their weights and measures are Syrian; and it is, too, the port of Palestine, from which the merchant barges sail.
Tabuk is a small town in which stands the mosque of the Prophet-God's peace and blessings be upon him.
A Summary Account of Conditions in this Region The climate of Syria is temperate, except for that portion of the centre of the region from al-Sharat to al-Hulah: this area is hot, producing indigo, the banana, and the palm. One time when we were in Jericho, the physician Ghassan, said to me: “Do you see this valley?" Said 1: “Yes, indeed." “Well," said he, “it extends from here to al-Hijaz, thence through to al-Yamama and on to ʿUman and Hajar; then it goes by Basra on to Baghdad, then up to the left (west) of al-Mawsil to al-Raqqa: it is indeed a wadi of heat and of palm trees."
The coldest place in this region is Baʿlabakk and the area around there. A popular saying here is that “it was asked of the cold, ‘Where will we find you?' It said, ‘In al-Balqa'. ‘But ifwe find you not there?' it answered, ‘Baʿabakk is my home.'"
This is a blessed region, a land of low prices and of fruits; and of upright people. The area that is upwards towards where the Romaeans are abounds more in streams and fruits, and the climate is colder. The lower area is more favored and more pleasant, the fruits too are more delicious, and it is more abundant in palm trees. There is not in the province, however, a river that is navigable, except by ferries. Learned men are rare, non-Muslims are numerous, as are lepers. There is no respect for preachers. The Samaritans are to be met with there, all the way from Palestine to Tiberias, but you will not meet there either Magians or Sabaeans. As to affiliation with schools of theology, the people of Syria are those rightly guided, upholders of authority and tradition. The people of Tiberias, however, and half the population of Nabulus and Qadas, and most of the people ofʿAmman, are Shiʿa. The Muʿtazilites have but little presence here, and remain in concealment. At Jerusalem is a community of the Karramites who possess cloisters and houses of assembly. You do not meet a follower of the school of Malik or of Dawud in this region. The adherents of al-AwzaʿI hold their assembly in the mosque of Damascus. In ritual practice the people of Syria used to follow the role of the Traditionists. The jurisprudents are followers of al-ShafiʿI. It is the rare city or town where you do not find disciples of Abu HanIfa, and oftentimes the Qādhis (judges) are of this school. Now if it should be asked of me: “Why do you not just say that the ritual practices of religion are carried out according to the school of al-Shafiʿi, considering that the leading scholars there are all of this school?" I reply: “This is the utterance of one who cannot make a distinction. You see, it is the practice of the school of al-Shafiʿi to recite out loud the ‘Bismillilh' (in the name of God), and to recite the qunilt during the dawn
p. J80
151
THE REGION OF AL-SHAM (SYRIA)
prayer. But as for us, we do not recite the qunilt except in the days of the latter half of the month of Ramadhan, during the lwitr'. And there are other practices that the people of Syria do not adopt, for they disapprove of them. Was it not seen how, when their ruler ordered the recitation of the ‘Bismillah' out loud in Tiberias, the people protested this iniquity to Kiifiir al-Ikhshldl because they found his deed utterly repugnant?" Today the ritual is generally according to the practice of the Fatimites, and we shall refer to these, with other of their peculiar customs, in our account of the region of the western countries, if it please God, may He be exalted.
Of the systems of Reading the Quriin, by far the most prevalently followed is that of Abu ʿAmr, except only in Damascus, where none may lead the prayer in the mosque unless he read according to the system of Ibn ʿAmir, for this is the best-known among the people, and is their choice. The system of reading of al-KisaʾJ has gained ground throughout the region; in any case, they make use of the seven systems of Readings, and strive earnestly to achieve perfection in observing them.
Commerce. The trade of Syria is profitable. From Palestine come olive-oil, quttayn (figs), raisins, and locust fruit; poplin, soap, and towels. From Jerusalem come cheeses, cotton, the famous raisins known as ʿAynOnl, and Dnri; excellent apples, and bananas,
Addition/version MS. c.
The banana is a fruit in the form of a cucumber, covered with a skin which is
peeled off from the fruit. It is soft like the water melon, though more delicious
and sweeter.
the incomparable pine nuts called “Quraysh-Bite"; also mirrors, lamp-jars, and needles. From Jericho, indigo of the finest quality; from Sughar and Baysiin, indigo and dates. From ʿAmmān, grain, lambs, honey; from Tiberias, carpet material, paper, and cloth; from Qadas, cloths called “munayyar" and “balʿlsl"; also ropes. From Ttre come sugar, glass beads, and glass vessels both cut and elegantly formed; from Maʾab the kernels of almonds; from Baysiin, rice. From Damascus come olive oil fresh pressed, balʿlsl cloth, silk brocade, essence of violet of an inferior quality, brass vessels, paper, nuts, figs, and raisins. From Aleppo, cotton, clothes, potash, and al-Maghra (red ochre); from Baʿ/abakk, the fig sweetmeat called “Malban".
Unequalled are the quttayn figs, omphacine oil, white bread, the veils of al-Ramla; and nonpareil are the quinces, the pine nuts called “Quraysh-Bite", the ʿAynOnl and Dorl raisins, the theriac, the calaminth, and the rosaries of Jerusalem. You should know, moreover, that gathered together in the province of Palestine are thirty-six products not to be found together in any other land. The first seven of these are found only in Palestine; the following seven are rarely found in other countries; and of the remaining two and twenty, though only found
p. 181
152	THE BEST DIVISIONS F0R KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
assembled together in Palestine, many are found variously associated elsewhere. The first seven are the pine nuts called “Quraysh-Bite", quince, ʿAynOnl and Dflri raisins, the Kafori plum, the SibaʿI fig, and the Damascene fig. The next seven are the Colocasia water lily, the sycamore fruit, the locust fruit, the artichoke, the jujube, sugarcane, and the Syrian apple. The others are fresh dates and olives, citron, indigo, juniper, bitter orange, the mandrake, the lotus fruit, the nut, the almond, asparagus, bananas, sumac, cabbage, truffles, lupins, and the early black prune called “al-Tarl"; together with snow, buffalo milk, beeswax, the superb ʿ.Asiml grape, and the date fig. There is the preserve called al-qubbayt [sweetmeat of carob, almonds, pistaschios]; certainly the like of it may be found elsewhere, but the flavour is different. You also see the lettuce, included usually among the vegetables, except at al-Ahwaz, where it is really of surpassing excellence. Incidentally, at al-Basra, also, it is considered distinct from the more common vegetables.
Measures of Capacity: The people of al-Ramla use the qafiz, the wayba, the makkūk, and the kaylaja.
The kaylaja equals about one and one half sā<s.
The makkūk equals three kaylajas.
The wayba equals two makkiiks.
The qafiz is four waybas.
The people of Jerusalem are distinctive in that they use the mudy (modius), and it contains two-thirds of a qafiz; and they use the qabb, which is a fourth of the mudy. They do not use the makkūk except in official measurements.
In ʿAmman the mudy is six kaylajas; their qafiz is half a kaylaja, and it is by this measure they sell their olives and quttayn figs.
In Tyre the qafiz is the same as the mudy of Jerusalem, and their kaylaja equals a saʿ.
The ghirāra of Damascus equals one and one half Palestinian qafiz. p. 182 Measures ofWeight. Over the area from Hims to al-Jifllr the ratls are of some six hundred (dirhams of weight), though there are variations. The heaviest is the ratl of Acre, the lightest that of Damascus.
The ūqiyya (ounce) varies from fifty down to forty and a few odd (dirhams of weight), and every ratl contains twelve uqiyya; except only at Qnnasrln, where it is two thirds of this.
The standard weight of the coinage is approximately the same everywhere, and the dirham should weigh sixty grains, the grain being the grain of barleycorn. The dānaq should weigh ten grains, the dinar twenty-four qirats, and the qirat is three and one half grains of barley.
Manners and Customs. In Syria their custom is to keep the lamps in their mosques always lighted, and suspend them by chains, as at Makka. In every
153
THE REGION OF AL-SHAM (SYRIA)
provincial capital, in the great mosque is a treasury in a chamber resting on pillars. Between the covered portion of the mosque and the court are doors, except at Jericho; and you do not see paving of the court with pebbles, except at the mosque of Tiberias. The minarets are square, and the centres of the roofs of the covered portions of the mosques are ridged. Moreover, at the gates of the mosques, and in the market places, are places for the ablution.
It is customary to be seated between every two taslima of the tarāwih, and some persons recite but once the prayers enjoined to be said in series of uneven numbers (witr), though formerly they were said thrice. In my day Abu Ishaq of Marw issued an order as a result of which they made a distinction in this practice in Jerusalem. When the Imam rises to pray at each tarwiha, the crier calling the prayer adds the words, “God have mercy upon you"; in Jerusalem they pray six tarwihas. The preachers are usually professional tellers of pious stories; however, the followers of Abo Hanlfa hold their assembly for preaching in the Masjid al-Aqsa, reading from a volume, just as also do the Karramites in their cloisters. It is the custom for the guards to proclaim aloud the profession of faith after the Friday prayers. The jurisprudents hold their assemblies between the two day prayers, and between the two evening prayers, and the reciters of the Qurān also hold their assemblies in the mosques.
Among the Christian feasts that the Muslims here acknowledge, and by which they determine the seasons of the year are: Easter, about the time of Nayrllz (the New Year); Whitsuntide, at the time of heat; and the Nativity, at the time of cold; the Feast of St. Barbara at the time of the rains, and indeed there is a popular saying to this effect: “When the Feast of St. Barbara comes round, the mason may pick up his flute," meaning that he may as well sit at p. 183 home. There is also the Feast of the Kalends (first day of January), and again one of their proverbs is, “When the Kalends come, sit close to the fire and stay in the house!”-،he Feast of the Cross (mid-September) at the time of the grape harvest, and the Feast of Lydda (late April) at sowing time. The months in use here are those of the Romaeans: Tishrln first and second (October and November), Kanun first and second (December and January), Shubat (February), Adhar (March), Naysan (April), Ayyar (May), Hazlran (June), Tammuz (July), Ab (August), and Aylul (September).
It is seldom you encounter a jurisprudent here who introduces heretical doctrines, or a Muslim who has a secretaryship; the exception is at Tiberias, which has always produced scribes. I must say that the scribes here, as in Egypt, are Christians, the Muslims simply depending on their knowledge of their language, they themselves not undertaking the literary discipline even as foreigners do. Whenever I was present at the assembly of the Chief of the Qādhis in Baghdad I used to be embarrassed at how ungrammatical his use of Arabic was; this, however, is not considered a blemish.
Most of the assayers, the dyers, cambists, and tanners in this region are Jews; while the physicians and the scribes are generally Christians.
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
154
Let me state here that there are five feasts in five areas in the realm of Islam that have special splendour: Ramadhan [the month of fasting] at Makka; Laylat al-Khatma [the night of completion of the reading of the Qur>ān], in the Aqsa Mosque; the two Feasts [ʿld al-Fitr at end of Ramadhan, and ʿld al-Adhha beginning the tenth day of the month of Pilgrimage] in Isqiliyya (Sicily); the Day of ʿArafa [ninth day of the month of Pilgrimage] at Shiraz; and Friday in Baghdad. In addition to these the middle night of the month of Shaʿban at Jerusalem; and the Day of the ʿAshūraʾ [tenth day of Muslim month of Muharram] at Makka are splendidly observed.
The Syrians dress well, both the scholar and the simple wearing the long loose outer ridā> (cloak). They do not go shod in summertime, except in the use of the single-soled sandal. Their graves are built up in mounds; the people walk behind the bier, and gently draw the corpse, head foremost, from the bier to the grave. In order to complete the reading of the Qur>ān, they go to the burial ground for the three days following a person's death.
The people here wear their raincloaks thrown open; and they do not scallop their taylasāns. In al-Ramla, the chief cloth merchants ride Egyptian asses, with saddles; it is only Amirs or Chiefs who ride horses. It is only the villagers and the scribes who wear the du"ā<a. The clothing of the rustics in the country district around Jerusalem and Nabulus is the single kisā> [long shirt-like enveloping garment], and without drawers. Ovens are used here called [urn; the countrypeople make ovens called tābūn, ofbaked brick, small, and in the ground. These they pave with pebbles, and ignite a fire of dried dung around and above. When the fire has become red-hot the loaves are thrown on the pebbles. There are also in this region cooks who specialize in lentil dishes and baysār [a dish containing Jew's mallow, beans, butter, and sometimes meat]. They also set to boil, in olive oil, beans that have sprouted, then fry them; these are sold to p. 184 be eaten with olives. Also, they salt lupine, and eat quite a lot of it. They make from the locust tree a sweetmeat which they call qubbayt; that which they make from sugar they call natif. They make zalabiya (sweet cakes) in the winter, but they do not plait the dough. In the majority of the above customs they correspond to the people of Egypt; in some few customs the people of al-ʿIrāq and Aqūr resemble them.
Products. There are iron mines in the mountains above Bayriit, and near Aleppo is the red mineral (Maghra), here of excellent quality, some inferior to it being at ʿAmman. In this region of Syria occur reddish coloured mountains, the material of which is called samaqa (sandstone): it is easy to work. There are whitish mountains the material of which is called hawwāra (chalk), less hard than the samaqa, used to whitewash ceilings, and plaster the roofs of the terraces. In Palestine are quarries of white stone, and a quarry of marble is at Bayt Jibril. In the area of the Ghawr are mines of sulphur and other minerals; from the Dead Sea, salt in powder form is derived. The best honey is that from Jerusalem and
155
THE REGION OF AL-SHAM (SYRIA)
from Jabal ‘Amila, derived from the wild thyme. The best muri [fish or meat pickle] condiment is that made at Jericho.
Holy Places. We have mentioned most ofthese in the introductory to this region; were we to enumerate their locations our book would be over-long. However, I will just mention that the greater number of them are in the neighbourhood of Jerusalem, fewer throughout Palestine, and still fewer in Jordan.
Waters. The waters of this region are for the most part very good. However, the water at Baniyas is purgative, that of Tyre, constipating. The water at Baysan is heavy and unhealthy, but God preserve us from that at Sughar! The water of Bayt al-Ram is very bad; however you do not find lighter, more digestible water than that at Jericho. The water of al-Ramla is easy of digestion; but that of Nabulus is rough. The waters at Damascus and Jerusalem are the least rough, for the climate is the least arid.
In this region is a number of rivers which flow into the Romaean Sea (Mediterranean), except for the Barada, which cuts through below the city of Damascus and waters the district, after dividing into a number of branches. It curves around the northern portion of the city, then separates into two streams of which one flows towards the desert and into a fen, while the other descends to join the Jordan river. [The Jordan also is an exception.] The Jordan River flows down from above Baniyas and forms a lake opposite Qadas; thence descending to Tiberias, it passes into the lake there, descending whence through the valleys of the Ghawr it falls into the Overturned Lake (Dead Sea): this is completely salty, wild, inverted, and stinking. It is set amid the mountains, and has but few waves.
The Romaean Sea bounds Syria on the west, and the Sea of China touches its southern coast. Opposite Tyre is the Island of Qubrus (Cyprus), said to be a journey of twelve days all around it. Here are populous cities, and for the Muslims here are advantages and prosperity, by reason of the abundance of goods coming from there, products including cloth stuffs, and manufactures. It is ruled by whatever power is dominant around there at the time. The distance thither by sea is the sailing of a day and a night; therefrom to the country of the Romaeans is a like distance.
The Remarkable Sights ofthe Region of Syria. There is atJerusalem on the outskirts ofthe city a cave of immense size. I have heard some of the learned say, and have read, besides, in books, that it leads to the people ofMoses. (Quran, sura 28, vv. 76-81; sUra 29, v. 40) I am far from sure of this, for it seems to be but a stone quarry. It has passages throughout along which one may go with torches. Between Palestine and the Hijaz, that is, between al-Ramla and Wayla, are the stones with which the people of Lot were pelted. (Quran, sUra 11, vv. 82-83) They lie along the Road of the Pilgrims, are striped, and both large and small.
p. 185
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
156
Near Tiberias are boiling springs that supply most of the hot baths of the town. A conduit has been laid to each bath, so that the steam heats the rooms of the building, and thus there is no need for a fire. In the first compartment you enter, cold water is at hand which may be mingled with the hot in the amount to cleanse oneself, and there are lavatories for the Ablution with this same water. In this area are other hot springs called al-Hamma (hot waters); should one suffering from mange, ulcers, or tumours, or other such maladies bathe himself here for three days, and then bathe himself in another spring which is cold, he will be cured, if God wills it. I have heard the people of Tiberias relate that all around these springs there used to be bath houses, each house for the relief of a specific ailment; anyone with that disease who bathed there would be cured; these bath houses were there right down to the time of Aristotle. He, however, requested of the king of that time the demolition ofthese bath houses, lest people be able to dispense with the services of physicians. This account, indeed, may very well be true, seeing that on the arrival of every sick person, he is obliged to immerse himself completely in the water of each spring, so that he may attain the one that provides his cure.
The Lake ofSughar (the Dead Sea) is a remarkable place, for the River Jordan and the River of al-Sharat both pour into it but do not change its condition. It is said that one does not sink easily in its waters; it is said, moreover, that if one has an enema from its waters it will cure him of many disorders. They hold a feast day in the month of Ab (August) when those with bad symptoms and ailments repair thither. In the mountains of al-Sharat, too, are hot springs.
In Palestine, every night in summer when the south wind blows, there falls a dew in such quantity that from it water flows in the drain pipes of the Masjid al-Aqsa.
The Abu Riyah (wind vane) at Hims is a talisman made to protect against scorpions. If one takes clay and presses it thereon, he will obtain relief from the sting of the scorpion, by the grace of God-may He be exalted; the effect, of course, derives from the image, not from the clay. The cities of Solomon-peaea on him-Baʿlabakk and Tadmur, are among the wonders here, as are the Dome of the Rock, the Mosque of Damascus, and the harbours of Tyre and Acre. Addition/version MS. c.
Jerusalem has a talisman against the bite of serpents; and behind the pulpit in the mosque at Jerusalem is a marble slab bearing an inscription, rather faint, in the veining of the stone, saying: “Muhammad is the Messenger of God.” Another slab bears the inscription: “In the name of God, the Most Benignant, the Merciful.”
The situation of this region (of Syria) is delightful. It may be divided into four zones. The first zone is that which borders the Romaean Sea. It is a plains area, with frequent accumulations of sand and soils of varied qualities. Of the towns here are al-Ramla, and all the cities on the sea coast. The second zone is
p. 186
157
THE REGION OF AL-SHAM (SYRIA)
the mountain country, wooded, with villages, springs, and cultivated fields. Of the cities situated here are: Bayt Jibril, Jerusalem, Nabulus, al-LajjOn, Kabul, Qadas, al-Biqaʿ, and Antakiya (Antioch). The third zone is that of the valleys of the Ghawr wherein are villages and streams, palm trees, cultivated fields, and indigo. Among the towns here are Wayla, Tabuk, Sughar, Ariha, Baysan, Tiberias, and Baniyas. The fourth zone is that bordering on the desert. Here, mountains are high and bleak; and though the climate is close to that of the desert, yet it has villages, and springs, and trees. Of the towns therein are Maʾab, ʿAmman, Adhri'at, Damascus, Hims, Tadmur, and Aleppo. The sacred mountains such as the Mount of Olives, the hills of Siddiqa, of the Lebanon, and of al-Lukkam, are in the second zone; the “Navel of the Holy Land" is in the mountains that overhang the coast.
One day I happened to be present at the assembly of Abu Muhammad al-Mikall, the chief doctor of law at NaysabOr, and the jurisprudents were in attendance for open discussion. Abu al-Haytham was asked whether he could provide proof of the acceptability of the tayammum with chalk. He advanced as argument the saying of the Prophet-God's peace and blessings be upon him- “Thou hast made the earth for me a place of prayer and a means of purification," extending the meaning to soil of all kinds. Responded the questioner, “Not at all! Only the soil of the plain is intended, and not that of the mountain." Then followed a lot of exchange and discussion, and they delighted in their own loquacity. Then said I, speaking to Abu Dharr bin Hamdan, one of the most disputatious: “We must disavow the speaker of such a faulty argument as this learned jurisprudent has advanced. For has not God-may He be exalted-said: ‘Enter into the Holy Land' (Quran, sura 5, v. 21), and is not the same a mountainous country?" So he began to quibble and split hairs, alleging matters that did not at all refute our argument. Then another jurisprudent, Sahl bin al-Su٩uki remarked: “He absolutely said only: ‘Enter the land'; and not ‘Go ye up into the mountains.”' But the discussion was dropped. Now, should someone say to me why it may not be pointed out that the gate to the Holy Land being at Jericho, and God having commanded them to enter thereby; and since Jericho is in the Ghawr and not in the mountains, then that which the Imam, the son of the Imam, adduced was correct: then my refutation of this would be two-fold. First of all is the jurisprudential argument, to wit, that the Holy Land is a mountainous country, without doubt or question whatever, and Jericho is in the plains, and a dependency of it. Now the clear and literal meaning of the verse refers to al-Quds (the Holy City), which is Jerusalem, and which is, indeed, situated in the mountains; it does not refer to the dependencies of the plains or of the valleys ofthe Ghawr. But if it were maintained that the verse refers to the City of the Giants, that is Jericho, which they were commanded to enter, then the verse applies to both interpretations: entering into the Holy Land, and also into the aforementioned city (Jericho); however the application of the verse, according to your interpretation, is confined to the land alone, despite the fact
p. 187
^JO junoj I٠؛s3ucqj3A0 ipitjAt ‘(S3A أبمو Xpeoipī OABIJ 3M tpiijMjo puB ‘X٧D ^I.H JOJ SB ،A\ON ااأ3 tuogiaj aqujo sujnjunoui ^yoj‘ ااأ3دjXbz IBqef :3JE؟ (ااأ3 Bg؛p ااأ3 atuoSag), :jajnj؛ jno^ JOJ paau ou OABIJ 3 AY ٨؛أأءة3ر dcaj no^ UBIJM J33X3؛؛)
ااأ3 MOS no^ UBip spaas 3UO dcaj no^ (3qsn٩؛
3U٠ ‘mos noX (3qsn٩ 3JE SpUOUUJB ٩؛اا3ل ‘JSAO IJB 3JE spaa AY ااأ3 uyoud ؛s ل0س pjvq ؛s ااأ3 jo٩bj‘
؛SUJooB u‘ ل؛3ا1؛
؛ssbjS U33MS u ؛jood s‘
3AO٩B JEJ اا31 )SUJtyd MO؛
؛OJ asop s اا31 }،SU3AB3l
^jno ٨؛للءج3 OJ للا3"أ „Xw ٨؛للءج3؛؛اno^ Jjoddns pory Abuu,, —31( PIES— ٨؛للءج3 ٧no٩B uuajBsnuaf UUOUJ mvswjB؛ PJBS OS اأ3 OJ ااأ3 joauaqu OUMO: „J3S3٥؛3٩ pcq uaquo JO 3[n ؛٧ ؛ssassod aqvu OJ pujuu u؛ipitjAt ‘IIAUUBIJS jXb٥jo uo ؛B s 3pun (BuauBiu Āuu pjcoq OABIJ I‘ IIV p٩v٧؟M ٩؟لا ASBtjsf؟ auuos Moq uunoooj ung ااأ3 p aqujo japcaj؛ssnos؛٠٩v ‘uo ^BS pBuuuuBijnj؛p‘ „uiOJj S3UU03 3٧ ااأ3ل3أء؛ Mouq pjnow no^ os auop noX ؛٧ I؛uo S3 ااأ3 ٩d؛SuotiuB JOU puB u ااأ3 B٧unouu؛su'؛؛
BS؛P اأ3 A3 no^„ :am OJ؛P3J3JU3 J3A3U OABMjpsjnoX ^I٧U3P الأ3 pcq JOJ ‘X٧D AgtH JOJ sn MOM ااأ3 ]jn؛٧t٧3pnjds ٠٩٧ ‘uuiq uo sjuatunSjE asaqu paSm IUOIJM ‘jjBqa qonuu 3٩ا3٧ل ٧IA\ anSjc OJ JOU}•u٧m 1
الأ3 XpH pjnow JOAooi puB٦ ؛3 uo JSJSU؛ااأ3ل SU0٧٧J3SSB OMU asaqu JO‘ ؛٧ 3J3M uvqu JO ‘X٧D XpH ااأ3 bjEg-iB JO puB tuajcsnaaf JO supounouu؟؛ JO lied ou 3JB 3 :suojsnpuoo 881 d؛ااأ3ل J3JU3 OJ JOU papUBUUUUOO 3J3M Xotp uvqu اا31 B٧unouu؛atpjo su sjouujatjujnj opoiuaf‘ اأ3 sjsjsjad otjAt ؛u ااأ3 uuauunSv ؛OMJJO 3UO tpiAS pooBj s PIP؛ JOJ اا31د P3J3JU3 ؛٧ UUOJJ J3AO passojo puv gb[Bg-[B MO(3٩ اا31 OJ tucpjof ssod؛٩؛I؛0 ؛s ااأ3؛ل J3٧u3؛3u ااأ3 tginouqu pucj ااأ3 B٧unouu؛sc ‘su‘ ؛uoej u‘ ااأ3د JOJ ؛٧ OJ uvqu panSjc 3٩ ااأ3د3J3M OJ 3pv٩ ق0 uaqu Eas Aq ااأ3 ٧0ألدEU٧3J؛u؛3u B٧unouu sip UOOAtrOq؛puB ^Jjtunoo u ااأ3 33S puv ،B3g pB3٥؛uvqu āu ؛٧ ؛ssod uou s؛3j٩ ,,sjossajddo؛؛ 3J3M ؛J3f u؛I atlUBS tpilJM ‘OlJ3؛S3 ؛u اا31 JO ^3((BA اأأ3 CjAVBqO 3J3M 35JBUU OJ 3pv٩ اا31؛ل 1٧3الد ؛Spi^-JB tutu (الأ3 X٧D AgtH)، س}11ل3 اا31 دا31 od puooas؛٧u B٧٧n٩3J ^UUJO) ؛S IBDiqdBjSooS s؛33U اا31د [اا31 I3BJSJ؛[S3٧ اا31 ٨؛3؛1٧؛ادuvqujo ءوؤنم؛
uuauuajBus‘ „ااأ3ل3 ajdoad 3JE ؛u ؛٧‘ sjossaaddo‘؛؛ (SUB3UU \11 A ‘s BJQS (ugftnQ „؛u B٧unouu s٧t pUB؛3JE su ؛papuaju ؛u q٧؛pt٧v '3SJ3A s ااأ3؛ل [ا:لاا ااأ3 3BJSI!؛[S3٧ ٩)BJQS ‘unftnQ) «'P3SS3 غ، A لعغ)؛ M؛٧noq٧ uojjsanb q٧o٩ ااأ3 tqd؛٧S3IB٥J0 su؛‘3U tuodn ااأ3 n3uBi otjAt ajdoad؛IJB ‘p3t(s ااأ3 puv USES ااأ3 ٧S3M JO ااأ3 pcq 3 AY pucj JUB3UU ااأ3 ؛٧B٧3jd٧3٧u؛a OABIJ I suo؛h Aq ‘t٧3A؛3 AY puv,, :SuiXbs s p3q٧B3nb3٩ jsqjjnj J3٧٧3٩‘ ؛٧ BUU^ uvqu uno pajujod 3٩ Bx^po٥)p3٧ H 3٩؛٩JB3۶3U٧BU S uvqu ااأ3 s papuajxa 3JOUU؛u3؛٧B3y؛uo س3 UB3 ى3٨ pe3J B؛JO 3u ااأ3 uPfind‘ ااأ3
8SĪ
SN0I033 لاHL JO 30Q3TAV0NN u SNOISIAia LS38 3HL
159
THE REGION OF AL-SHAM (SYRIA)
made mention. There is Jabal Siddlqa, lying between Tyre, Qadas, Baniyas and Sayda. Here is the tomb of Siddlqil, with a mosque close by, in relation to which a festival is held on the middle day of the month of Shaʿban; great numbers of people gather there from the towns all around, and the deputy of the ruler is also present. It so happened that once, when I was staying in this area, and the middle day of Shaʿban fell on a Friday, the Qādhl Abu al-Qasim bin al-ʿAbbās invited me to preach. In my sermon I urged on them the restoration of this mosque, which they executed, and built a pulpit therein. I have heard them assert that a dog in pursuit of a wild animal, reaching the boundaries of this holy place, stops short; and there are other stories of a like kind.
Jabal Lubnan (Mount Lebanon) is a continuation of this mountain. It is well wooded and abounds in fruits that may be eaten communally. Here are a number of small springs, around which devotees have built for themselves huts of straw. They subsist on those communal fruits, and they earn money from cutting the Persian reeds and the myrtle, and other such things which they carry into the towns; all this is sufficient to support them.
Jabal al-Jawlan is over against this, towards Damascus, as we have stated. Here it was I met Abū Ishaq al-BallUtl, with forty men dressed in garments of wool. These people have a mosque in which they assemble. I found him to be quite a learned jurisprudent, of the sect of Sufyan al-Thawrl. I learned that these people feed themselves on acorns-a fruit about the size of a date, but bitter. They split it, keep it until it turns sweet, then grind it; and here is also a wild barley which they mix with it.
Jabal Lukkam is the most populous mountain area of Syria; it is also the p. 189 largest in extent, and the richest in fruit trees. At present, however, it is in the hands of the Armenians. TarsUs is beyond these mountains, Antioch on this side of them.
The government is in the hands of the ruler of Egypt. Sayf al-Dawla had some time ago gained control of the northern portion of the country.
Taxes in Syria are light, except for those levied on the caravanserais, in which case they are absolutely oppressive, as we mentioned in our account of the Holy City. The himayat (property taxes) are also heavy. From Qnnasrln and al-ʿAwasim they amount to three hundred sixty thousand dinars; from al-Urdunn (Jordan), one hundred seventy thousand dinars; from Palestine two hundred fifty-nine thousand dinars; from the area ofDamascus, upwards of four hundred thousand dinars. I have seen it said in the book of Ibn Khurradadhbih that the kharaj (land tax) of Qnnasrln is four hundred thousand dinars, that of Hims three hundred forty thousand, that of Jordan three hundred fifty thousand, and that of Palestine five hundred thousand dinars.
Addition/version I c.
The length of Syria extends from Midyan Shutayb up to the frontiers [with the
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
160
Romaeans], and is a journey of thirty-nine days. The width varies: that portion of Syria near al-Hijaz is rather narrow, while that portion towards the frontiers is wider.
Distances Along the Main Roads
From Halab to Balis, two days.
From Halab to Quinnasrln, one day; likewise to al-Atharib.
From Halab to Manbij, two days.
From Halab to Antakiya, five days.
From Antakiya to al-Ladhiqiyya, three days.
From Manbij to the Euphrates, one stage.
From Hims to Jūsiya, one stage; thence to Ya'ath, one stage; thence to Baʿabakk, half a stage; thence to al-Zabadanl, one stage; thence to Damascus, one stage.
From Hims to ShamsI, one stage; thence to Qāra, one stage; thence to al-Nabk, one stage; thence to al-Qutayyifa, one stage; thence to Damascus, one stage.
From Hims to Salamiyya, one stage; thence to al-Qastal, two stages; thence to Darraʿa, the same; thence to al-Rusllfa, the same; thence to al-Raqqa, half a stage.
From Hims to Hamat, one stage; thence to Shayzar, one stage; thence to Kafartab, one stage; thence to Qnnasrln, one stage; thence to Halab, one stage.
From Damascus to Baʿabakk, or to any of the following places is a two-day
journey: Tarabulus, Bayrūt, Sayda, Baniyas, Hawran, al-Bathaniyya, and
AdhriC:tt.
From Damascus to the further limit of the Ghūta, or to Bayt Sarca is, in either
case, one stage.
From Damascus to al-Kuswa is two barids; thence to Jasim, one stage; thence to Flq (Aflq), the same; thence to Tiberias, one post-stage (three miles).
p. 190
161
THE REGION OF AL-SHAM (SYRIA)
From Baniyas to Qadas or to Jubb Yosuf (Joseph's Pit) is, in either case, two post stages.
From BayrOt to Sayda, or to Atrabulus is, in either case, one stage. p. 191 From Tiberias to al-LajjOn, or to either Jubb Yosuf, Baysan, ʿAqabat Aflq, al-Jashsh, or Kafarklla, is in every case, one stage.
From Tiberias to Adhricat or to Qadas, one stage.
From ʿAqabat Aflq to Nawa, one stage;
thence to Damascus, one stage.
From Jubb Yosuf to Baniyas, one stage.
From al-LajjOn to Qalansuwa is one stage; thence to al-Ramla, one stage.
If you prefer you may go from al-Lajjfln to Kafar Saba by the post road, one stage; thence to al-Ramla, one stage.
From Baysan to Tacasir, two post stages; thence to Nabulus, the same; and thence to Jerusalem, one stage.
From Jubb Yosuf to Qaryat al-ʿUy0n, two stages; thence to al-Qarʿ0n, one stage; thence to ʿAyn al-Jarr, one stage;
thence to Baʿlabakk, one stage; this route goes by the name ofTarlq al-Madarij (the Way of the Ladders).
From al-Jashsh to Sor, one stage.
From Sor to Sayda, one stage.
From Sor to Qadas, or to Majdal Salim, is two post stages.
From Majdal Salim to Baniyas, two post stages.
From Tiberias to ʿAkka, two stages.
From Jabal Lubnan (Mountains of Lebanon) to Nabulus, or to Qadas, or to Sayda, or to Sor, is, in every case, about one stage.
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
162
p. 192 From al-Ramla to either Jerusalem, or to Bayt Jibril, or to ʿAsqalan, or to al-Sukkariyya, or to Ghazza, or to Kafar Saba, by the post road, is, in every case, one stage.
From al-Ramla to Nabulus, or to Kafar Sallam, or to Masjid Ibrahim, or to Ariha is, in every case, one stage.
From al-Ramla to Yafa, or to al-MahUz, or to Arsuf, or to Azdūd, or to Rath is, in every case, one stage.
From Jerusalem to Bayt Jibril, or to Masjid Ibrahim, or to the River Jordan is, in every instance, one stage.
From ʿAsqalan to Yafa, or to Rath, in each case, is one stage.
From Ghazza to Bayt Jibril, or to Azdūd, or to Rath, is, in every instance, one stage.
From Masjid Ibrahim (Hebron) to Qāwūs is one stage; thence to Sughar is one stage.
From Kafar Saba to Qalansuwa is one stage.
From the River Jordan to ʿAmman is one stage.
From Nabulus to Ariha, or to Kafar Sallam, or to Baysan, in every case is one stage.
From Arlha to Bayt al-Ram is two post stages; thence to ʿAmman is one stage. From Sughar to Maʾab is one stage, and from Sughar to Wayla is four stages. From ʿAmman either to Maʾab or to al-Zurayqaʾ (al-Zarqaʾ) is, in every instance, one stage.
From al-Zurayqaʾ to Adhri'at is one stage; and from Adhri'at to Damascus is two stages.
From Qaysariyya (Caesarea) to Kafar Sallam, or to Kafar Saba, or to Arsuf, or to al-Kanisa, every instance is one stage.
From Yafa to ʿAsqalan is one stage.
The Region of Misr (E^t)
p.l93
This is the region in ruling which Pharaoh gloried over all mankind (Quriin, sUra 43, v. 51); and supplied at the hands ofJoseph sufficient to feed the inhabitants of the world. There are to be found the vestiges of the Prophets, the Wilderness, and Mount Sinai; the monuments ofJoseph, the scenes of the miracles ofMoses. Thither fled Mary with Jesus. God has mentioned this region repeatedly in the Quriin, and has shown its preeminence to mankind. It is one of the two wings of the world; and the excellences of which it can boast are countless. Its metropolis is the dome of Islam, its river the most splendid of rivers. Through its natural prosperity is Hijaz populated, and by its populace the season of the Pilgrimage is enlivened. Its beneficence spreads to the East and to the West, for God placed it between the two seas, and has extolled its reputation in the areas of the sunrise and of the place of sunset. Let me tell you that Syria, with all its greatness, is just a rural district of it, and Hijaz, with its inhabitants, depends on it. It is said to be “the height of land" (al-Rabwa) (Quriin, sora 23, v. 50), and its river flows with honey in Paradise. It has become again the abode of the Commander of the Faithful, and Baghdad has been superseded until the Day of Judgment; its metropole has now become the greatest glory of the Muslims. Even so, it has had drought for seven consecutive years; grapes and figs there are dear. The customs of the Copts p^ he٦and calamities ؛؛sit the:! constantly.
Misr, the son of Ham, the son of Noah (on whom be peace) colonized the country.
Herewith is an outline and representation of it [Map VIII]
We have divided the region of Egypt into seven districts, six of which are populated; it has, moreover, some extensive territories, with a number of large villages. Towns in Egypt are not numerous, because the majority of the people of the countryside are Copts; and in accordance with the terms of our science, a town is only so designated if it has a minbar [pulpit, i.e., as representing a mosque]. Coming from the direction of Syria, the districts are al-Jiflr; al-Hawf; al-Rīf; Iskandariyya; Maqadūniya; al-Saʿ.Jd; and the seventh, al-Wahat (the Oases).
Al-Jifar: Its capital is Al-Farama. Its chief towns are: al-Baqqara, al-Warrada, al-ʿArIsh.
Al-Hawf: Its capital is Bilbays, and among its towns are: Mashtol, JurjIr, P.194 Faqūs, Ghayfa, DabqU, Tuna, Barrlm, al-Qulzum.
Al-Rīf: Its capital is al-ʿAbbasiyya. Among its cities are: ShubrU, Damanhūr, Sanhiir, Banha al-ʿAsal, Shatnuf, Mallj, Mahallat Sidr, Mahallat Karmln, al-Mahallat al-Kablra, Sandafa, Damlra, Bora, Daqahla, Mahallat Zayd, Mahallat Hafs, Mahallat Ziyad, Sanhūr al-Sughra, Baris.
Al-Iskandariyya (Alexandria): Its capital is of the same name. Among its cities are: Al-Rashld (Rosetta), Maryiit, Dhat al-Humam, Burullus.
٩اما	،Y?fr۶٠
164 THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
Map VIII: Misr (see p. 412).
From MS. Sprenger 5—Ahlwardt 6034 by kind permission of the Staatsbibliothek Preussischer Kulturbesitz, Berlin, Orientabteilung.
165
THE REGION OF MISR (EGYPT)
Maqaduniya: Its capital is al-Fustat, which is also the metropolis. Among its towns are: Al-ʿAzIziyya, al-Jlza, ʿAyn Shams.
Al-Saʿld: Its capital is Uswan. Among its towns are: Hulwan, Qus, Akhmln, p. 195 Bulyana, ʿAllaqi, Ajmaʿ, Buslr, al-Fayyom, UshmUnayn, Sumusta, Tanda, Taha, Bahnasa, Qays.
Close to al-Hawf are two islands in two lakes, on which are situated the towns TinnIs and Dimyat (Damietta).
Addition/version MS . c.
The island of Tinnls and the island of Dimyat are situated in two small bodies of water connected with the Romaean Sea and the Nile. In this region are villages that have become famous by reason of goods derived from them, for instance Shata, Taha, Bahnasa, Qāys, Zufayta, Zuftaf, Zuftata, and indeed there remain many other towns I do not know about; however the more prominent ones are those I have mentioned. Over against the region, in the Romaean Sea, is the island of Iqrltish (Crete); it is a large island with cities and advantages.
The Romaeans had achieved dominion over it; however, the Fatimids have seized it from them.
Al-Farama on the shore of the Romaean Sea is the capital of al-Jifar, and lies about afarsakh from the sea. It is a flourishing populous town, over which stands a fortress, and it has fine markets. The town is situated in a salt marsh, so its water is brackish. The area around it provides hunting grounds for quail, and a source of the most excellent fish. A great variety of contrasting things is to be found here, and an abundance of agricultural products. Here, is the point of junction of well-known and well-traveled roads. However, its water is salty, and the flesh of the birds unhealthy to eat. This entire district of al-Jifilr is covered with golden sands, and the towns we have mentioned lie here and there within it. The district is traversed by roads, provides dates, has wells, and at a distance of every six miles there is a mart for supplies. Still, the wind sometimes plays upon the sands, the road is covered, and travel in the area is rendered difficult.
Bilbays is the capital of al-Hawf. It is large and flourishing, with many villages around it, and cultivated fields. The buildings are of mud.
Al-Mashtol has many mills, whence come most of the supplies of the Hijaz in the way of flour and biscuits. I took a count at one period of the year, and this trade amounted to three thousand camel loads every week, entirely of grains and flour.
p. 196	Al-Qulzum is an ancient town on the edge of the Sea of China. It is a
dry barren place, having neither water nor pasture, husbandry; no firewood, no trees, no grapes, no fruit. boats, also on camels, from a place some six miles away called Suways (Suez); it is drinkable, but of poor quality. A saying of theirs runs: “The provisions of the inhabitants of al-Qulzum come from Bilbays, their drinking water from Suways; they eat the meat of the billy goat, and for fire burn the rafters of their houses."
neither tillage nor animal Water is carried thither in
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
166
The place is, indeed, one of the cesspools of the world. The waters of its baths are of intense saltiness. The place is noisome and depressing, and to get there is difficult. Yet, the mosques here are well built, it has imposing public buildings, and thriving markets. It is the promptuary of Egypt, the seaport to al-Hijllz, a resort for relief to those on the Pilgrimage. One day I bought a dirham's worth of groats, to cook it required another dirham’s worth of firewood! This district has nothing good about it, and I see no merit in mentioning the remainder of its towns.
Al-ʿAbbasa is the capital of al-Rif; it is a populous, pleasant, and ancient town. The people derive their drinking water from the Nile. It is a place of fertility and abundance. The buildings are more spacious than the buildings of Misr (the capital). A variety of contrasting products is brought here. It has a fine mosque built of brick-altogether delightful, and distinguished.
Al-Mahallat al-KabIra has two sides [on the river], the name of the further side being Sandafil. On each of these sides is a mosque, that of al-Mahalla being in its centre, that of the other side pleasantly situated on the river bank. The side ofal-Mahalla is more populous, and has a fine oil market. The people travel back and forth in boats, and it seemed to me to look very much like Wilsit.
DamIra extends along the river bank; it is populous, and produces a melon of outstanding quality.
Al-Iskandariyya (Alexandria) is a delightful town on the shore of the Romaean Sea. Commanded by an impregnable fortress it is a distinguished city with a goodly meed of upright and devout people. The drinking water of the inhabitants is derived from the Nile, which reaches them in the season of its flood via an aqueduct, and fills their cisterns. It resembles Syria in climate and customs; rainfall is abundant; and every conceivable type of product is brought together there. The countryside round about is splendid, producing excellent fruits, and fine grapes. It is a clean town, and their buildings are of the kind of stone suited for maritime construction; it is also a source of marble. It has two mosques. On their cisterns are doors which are secured at night so that thieves may not make their way up through them. The remaining towns here are very well developed; and in the surrounding area grow locust, olives, and almonds, and their cultivated lands are watered by the rain. It is near here that the Nile debouches into the Romaean Sea. It is the city founded by Dhu al-Qarnayn (Alexander the Great), and has, indeed, a remarkable citadel.
Al-Fustilt is a metropolis in every sense of the word; here are together all the departments of government administration, and moreover, it is the seat of the Commander of the Faithful. It sets apart the Occident from the domain of the Arabs, is of wide extent, its inhabitants many. The region around it is well cultivated. Its name is renowned, its glory increased; for truly it is the capital city of Egypt. It has superseded Baghdild, and is the glory of Islilm, and is the marketplace for all mankind. It is more sublime than the City of Peace [Baghdild]. It is the storehouse of the Occident, the entrepot of the Orient, and
p. 197
167
THE REGION OF MISR (EGYPT)
is crowded with people at the time of the Pilgrimage festival. Among the capitals there is none more populous than it, and it abounds in noble and learned men. Its goods of commerce and specialties are remarkable, its markets excellent as is its mode of life. Its baths are the peak of perfection, its bazaars splendid and handsome. Nowhere in the realm of Islam is there a mosque more crowded than here, nor people more handsomely adorned, no shore with a greater number of boats. It is more populous than Naysabūr, more splendid than al-Basra, larger than Damascus. Victuals here are most appetizing, their savories superb. Confectioneries are cheap, bananas plentiful, as are fresh dates; vegetables and firewood are abundant. The water is palatable, the air salubrious. It is a treasury of learned men; and the winter here is agreeable. The people are well-disposed, and well-to-do, marked by kindness and charity. Their intonation in reciting the Quriin is pleasant, and their delight in good deeds is evident; the devoutness of their worship is well-known throughout the world. They have rested secure from injurious rains, and safe from the tumult of evildoers. They are most discriminating in the selection of the preacher and of the leader in prayer; nor will they appoint anyone to k.ad them but the most worthy, regardless ofexpense to themselves. Their judge is always dignified, their muhtasib deferred to like a prince. They are never free from the supervision of the ruler and the minister. Indeed were it not that it has faults aplenty, this city would be without compare in the world.
The town stretches for about two-thirds of a farsakh, in tiers one above the other. It used to consist of two quarters, al-Fustat and al-Jiza, but later on, one of the khalifs of the House of al-ʿAbbās had a canal cut around a portion of the town, and this portion became known as al-Jazlra (the island), because of its lying between the main course of the river and the canal. The canal itself was named the “Canal of the Commander of the Faithful," and from it the people draw their drinking water. Their buildings are of four storeys or five, just as are lighthouses; the light enters them from a central area. I have heard it said that about two hundred people live in one building. In fact, when al-Hasan bin Ahmad al-Qarmatl arrived there, the people came out to meet him; seeing them, as he considered, like a cloud of locusts, he was alarmed, and asked what this meant. The reply was: “These are the sightseers of Misr; those who did not come out are more numerous still."
I was one day walking on the bank of the river, and marveling at the great number of ships, both those riding at anchor, and those coming and going, when a man from the locality accosted me, saying: “Where do you hail from?" Said I, “From the Holy City." Said he, “It is a large city. But I tell you, good sir-may God hold you dear to Him-that of the vessels along this shore, and of those that set sail from here to the towns and the villages— all these ships were to go to your native city they could carry away its people, with everything_ that appertains to it, and the stones thereof and the timber thereof, so that it would be said: ‘At one time here stood a city.”'
p. 198
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
168
I once heard it said that there pray in front ofthe Iman on Friday close to ten thousand people. I did not believe it until I went out with the foremost of those bustling to the Sūq al-Tayr (Bird Market), and saw for myself that the matter was just about as had been stated. And being late, one day, I was strenuously repairing to the Friday prayers, and I found the lines of people in the markets extending to more than a thousand cubits from the mosque. And I saw, moreover, that the mercantile establishments, and the places of worship, and the shops p. 199 around the mosque were filled on every side with worshippers.
This particular mosque is known as al-Suflanl (the lower). It was founded by ʿAmr bin al-ʿA.s, and within it stands his pulpit. The building is well constructed, with some mosaics set into its walls. It stands on pillars of marble, and is bigger than the mosque at Damascus, and the crowding in it is greater than that of any of the six other mosques here. The markets are all around it, except that between them and the mosque, on the side towards the Qjbla, is the Dar al-Shatt, as well as storage places, and a place for performing the ablution. This district is the most flourishing in Misr; to its left is the Zuqaq al-Qanadll (the Corridor of the Lamps)-bbt one can have no idea of what Zuqaq al-Qanadll is like!
The Fawqanl (Upper) mosque was built by the House of Taylūn-؛t is larger and more magnificent than the SuflanI mosque. It is built on massive pillars adorned with stucco, its roofs are lofty. In its centre is a vaulted structure resembling that of Zamzam, and therein is a drinking fountain. The mosque overlooks both the mouth of the canal and some part of it. Some extensions have been added to it, while behind it are some handsome residences. Its minaret is of stone; it is small, and the steps to the top of it are on the outside.
In between the Lower and the Upper mosques stands the Mosque of ʿAbd Allah, built to the dimensions of the Kaʿba.
Addition/version MS. c.
A mosque stands in al-Jazlra and another in al-Jlza; and in the area round about the town (al-Fustat) stand quite a number of mosques, and attractive drinking places; also a group of servants of God, called al-Qārafa, who have a handsome mosque, built by Umm al-Maghribl. On the edge of al-Jazlra is an area called al-Mukhtara, wherein are situated the pleasure grounds of the kings of Egypt; here, too, is a mosque, and yet another in al-Qāhira (Cairo), this bringing the number to seven. Cairo used to be some distance from al-Fustat, but now the extent of its development reaches to the latter, which thus, at the present day has grown bigger than Baghdad. Al-Qāhira is a city which al-Maghrabl [i.e. the Fatimids] built, when he conquered Egypt and defeated those who were there.
His army is stationed there, and his palace is there; it is a large city, with forty public baths and beautiful marketplaces.
A full description of the qualities of its markets and its magnificence would extend to a great length. It is enough to say that it is the most important of the metropoles of the Muslims, their greatest pride, and the most populous of their towns. Yet notwithstanding this great aggregation of people, I have bought there
169
THE REGION OF MISR (EGYPT)
the purest white bread-in fact they bake no other-at thirty ratls for a dirham, eggs at eight for a diinaq, the quince at seventy to the dirham; bananas and dates are cheap also. The fruits of Syria and the Maghrib are brought there in all seasons, and people travel thither from al-ʿIrāq and the countries of the East. The ships of the Peninsula (Arabia) and of the Romaean countries traverse the seas thither constantly. Its commerce is remarkable, its trades profitable, its wealth abundant. Nowhere will you find sweeter water, more agreeable people, finer linen, or a river more beneficent.
For all that, its dwellings are cramped and full of fleas, the rooms noisome
and oppressive. Fruits are scarce, the water is muddy, the wells filthy, the houses are dirty, bugridden and stinking; mange is chronic. Meats are expensive, dogs
The people use abominable oaths, their manners are vile. They are
in constant fear of famine and the failure of the river, and are on the verge of compulsory exile-in fact they are constantly expecting calamity. Their elders do not abstain from the drinking of wine, nor their women from fornication. Thus, a woman has two husbands, and you will see the elder drunk. Even in their religion they have two factions; their countenances are dark, their language debased.
Al-Jazlra is lightly populated. The mosque and the Nilometer are at the end of it near the bridge, on the side towards the metropolis. Here are gardens and palms; and the promenade of the Commander of the Faithful is close to the canal, at a place called al-Mukhtara.
Al-Jlza is a town beyond the other side of the main stream. The road thither from al-JazIra used to go over a bridge there until the Fatimids removed it. The town has a mosque, and is more flourishing and larger than al-Jazīra. The high road departs from here to al-Maghrib. The canal joins the main stream below al-JazIra, at al-Mukhtara. Al-Qahira (Cairo) is a town which Jawhar the Fatimid built after he had conquered Egypt, and subjugated its inhabitants. It is large and well-built, with a splendid mosque. The imperial palace stands in its centre. The town is well fortified, having iron-plated gates. It is on the main road to Syria, and no one may enter al-Fustat except through here, as both places are situated between the mountain and the river. The Musallii (place of prayer), where public prayers in connection with the two festivals are said, is beyond the town, while the burial grounds are between the metropolis and the mountain.
Al-ʿAzIzIyya has become dilapidated, and altogether fallen into ruin. It was the capital in olden days, and here the Firʿawn (the Pharaoh) used to reside; his Qasr (palace) is still there, as well as the mosque ofJacob and Joseph.
ʿAyn Shams is a town on the main road to Syria, with widely cultivated fields; here is one of the dams of the Nile to hold the waters during its flood. The mosque stands in the marketplace.
Al-Mahalla is a town on the Alexandrian branch of the river. It has an elegant mosque, but not many markets. Otherwise, it is a well-developed place, having a pleasant riverbank and a delightful view of the river. Facing it is Sandafa with its mosque, and flourishing. The situation here seemed to me to
p. 200
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
170
resemble that at Wasit, except that here no bridge connects the two towns, the people crossing in boats.
Hulwan is a town in the direction of al-SaʿJd١ with caves and quarries, and p. 201 remarkable things. It possesses a public bath, above which another bath is built. The remaining towns are on either the main stream of the Nile or one or other of its two branches.
Uswan is the capital of al-Saʿīd (Upper Egypt), on the Nile. It is a large, flourishing town, possessing a tall minaret. Here are date palms in abundance, vineyards, natural resources, and it produces commercial products. It is, in fact, one of the major cities C?f Egypt.
Akhmlm, a town abounding in date palms, is situated on one of the branches of the Nile, possessing also vineyards, and cultivated fields. From here came Dhu al-Nūn, the Hermit. This area is the most elevated land in Egypt, and from within it the Nile issues forth.
Al-Fayyūm is an important place, with fields of the finest rice, and cotton of an inferior quality. It has a number of rich villages that are called al-Jawhariyyat.
Al-ʿAllaqi is a town on the outskirts of the district, on the road to ʿAydhab. With regard to al-Wahat (the Oases), they used to constitute a rich district, with trees and fields; and even today are found there varieties of fruits, and sheep and livestock, which have become wild. The Oases adjoin the territory of al-Sūdan, and touch also the boundary of the region of al-Maghrib, of which, in fact, some
make it a part.
	Tinnls, situated between the Romaean Sea and the Nile, is a small island
in a	lake, the whole of which has been built as a city-and what a city! It is
Baghdad in miniature! A mountain of gold! The emporium of the Orient and of the West! Markets are elegant, fish cheap. It is the goal of travelers, prosperity is evident, the shore delightful, the mosque exquisite, the palaces lofty. It is a town with resources, and well-populated, yet as it is situated on a narrow island, the water encircles it like a ring. It is, too, a boring, filthy place, where the water, kept in cisterns, is locked up. Most of its inhabitants are Copts. The refuse is thrown into the streets. Here are made coloured cloths and garments. Beside it is a place in which are piled up the dead of the unbelievers, one upon another, while the cemeteries of the Muslims are in the centre of the town.
Dimyat (Damietta): you may travel in this lake for a day and a night, p. 202 sometimes meeting with fresh water, and narrow straits, until reaching another town, which is better [than Tinnls], more spacious, wider, more open, more frequented; with more fruits, better construction, more water, artisans more skillful, cloths finer, more finished workmanship, better baths, stronger walls, and fewer vexations. Over it stands a fortress built of stone. It has many gates, and a large number of well-garrisoned outposts. A festival is held here every year to which the members of the garrisons come from all around. The Romaean Sea is within shouting distance of it, and the houses of the Copts are on the shore. It is here that the Nile flows into the sea.
171
THE REGION OF MISR (EGYPT)
Shata, a village between these two towns, and situated on the lake, is inhabited by Copts, and to it that distinctive cloth Shatawi owes its name.
Taha is a village in Upper Egypt in which woolen cloths of very high quality are made. From here came the jurist, al-Imam Abo Jaʿfar al-Azdl. At Bahnasa are made curtains and coverlets; while the finest quality flax is grown in Boslr.
A Summary Account of Conditions in this Region As for this region, when fortune smiles on it you need not ask about its fertility and low prices; but when it suffers drought, God save us from its famine, which once lasted seven years, so that the people were eating the dogs, and the most terrible epidemic afflicted them! The heat here is more intense than on the coasts of Syria, and in Toba [5th month of Coptic calendar] the cold is unbearable. Date palms are here in abundance. Most of the dhimmi here are Christians, denominated Copts; Jews are few. Lepers are many, and mange is chronic, because the place is decayed and stinking. Their main fare is fish.
The [Muslim] people here adhere to the schools of the inhabitants of Syria, though most of their jurists belong to the Malikite school of theology: as you observe, they pray in front of the Imam. Moreover, they raise dogs. The people of the upper part of the capital and those of Sandafa are Shī<a, while all the other schools are openly represented in al-Fustat. In this city is a separate quarter of the Karramites, and the Muʿtazilites are very much in evidence, as are the Hanbalites. Formal legal opinion at present is given according to the schools of the Fatimites, of which we treat in the account of the region of the Maghrib.
The seven systems of reading the Qurʾan are in use here, though that of Ibn ʿAmir is the least used. On an occasion when I used the latter in reading to p. 203 Abu al-Tayyib bin Ghalbon said he, “Give up this reading, for it is outmoded." Said I, “We have been told, ‘Keep the ancient tradition.'” Said he, “Very well, keep it.” I then read to him according to the system of Abo ʿAmr, and he continued to bid me to trill the “r" in “Maryam," and in “al-Tūria." The most prevalent and preferred among them is the reading according to the system of Nafiʿ, and in fact I heard a scholar in the Suflanl mosque say: “No Imam led the prayer before this mihriib, ever, that did not interpret the law according to Malik, and read according to the system of Nafiʿ, except for this one," meaning Ibn al-Khayyat. I asked him why that was. Said he, “We have found none better than he." He was a Shafiʿite, and read in the system of Abo ʿAmr. Never have I witnessed in all Islam finer chanting than his.
Their language is Arabic, but incorrect and lax; the non-Muslims converse in Coptic.
Egypt is a country of commerce; it is an important source of very fine leather, resistant to water, sturdy, and pliant; leather of sheep and asses' skins, leggings,
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
172
and cloth of three-ply yarn of camelshair and goats wool-all these are from the metropolis. From Upper Egypt come rice, wool, dates, vinegar, raisins. From Tinnls, (but not from Dimyat), cloth variegated in colour; from Dimyat, sugar cane. From al-Fayyūm, rice, and a linen of inferior quality; from Būslr, shrimp, and cotton of superior quality. From al-Farama, fish, and, from the towns around it, large baskets, and ropes made of fiber of the finest quality. Here are produced white cloth ofthe greatest fineness, wraps, canvas, the mats of ʿAbbadanl style of very fine quality, grains, grass peas, oils of rape, and of jasmine, and of other plants besides these.
Their specialties include reedpens incomparable! and their vitriol, marble, vinegar, wool, canvas, cloth, linen, leathers, shoes, leggings, fibers from the palm tree, geese, plantains, wax, sugar candy, fine linen, dyes, apparel, spun yarn, waterskins, harisa, the sweet pastry called nayda, chick peas, lupine, clover, arum, p. 204 mats, asses, cattle, girdles; their farms, rivers; their devoutness, the excellence of their chanting, the structure of their mosques; their special cheese, their confection [made of dates, butter and curds], their fish, their commercial establishments, their commerce, their tithing-ali of these are of most surpassing merit. To be found here also from among the special products of Palestine is the Colocasia-it is somewhat about the size of the round radish; it has a skin on it, and is quite piquant. It is fried in oil, and tossed with sikbaj [a mixture of cut flesh-meat, flour, and vinegar]. The banana also- is about the size of the cucumber; its thin skin is peeled off it, then the fruit is eaten; this has a sweetness and a pungency. The sycamore fig, also, which is smaller than the regular fig, and has a long pod. Also the fruit of the lupine, about the size of a fingernail; dry and bitter, it is sweetened and then salted. The lotus fruit, too; it is about the size of a medlar, and has a large pit: it is sweet, and is the fruit of the lotus tree. But they go beyond all of these in production of the nayda■. this is a kind of marzipan, made in an interesting way, being spread over a piece of cane until it dries and hardens. Moreover, oil of balsam is derived from a plant that grows there.
Addition/version MS. c.
We have already mentioned the banana, a fruit found in al-Basra, al-Hijaz, al-Yaman. Also the sycamore: this is a fruit about the size of a fig, with a long red appendage, a taste differing from that of the fig. The tree itself is enormous, and you will not see a thicker trunk than it; in fact, generally the doors of inns are made of this wood. The tree yields seven crops of fruit in the year, so no wonder it is cheap and everywhere available. The lupine has a seed about the size of a fingernail; it is sweetened and sold in the markets, then ground and fermented. Spices are added to it, and it is exported to Bukhara, where the women buy it for cooking. ... There is also the sidar fruit, popularly called the lotus of paradise, because of its scarcity. The people here use nayda much more than do the people of Syria: this is a type of marzipan, made in an interesting
173
THE REGION OF MISR (EGYPT)
way. ... Oil of balsam is extracted from a plant here ... there is also the Colocasia ... which is fried in oil and tossed with sikbaj: it is a weeping plant. It is extremely usoful in that one need only split up a root of it into date-size pieces, then plant them in the soil, and a plant like a banana tree will grow from each piece, with pretty leaves resembling the foliage of the banana tree.
The coinage of old here was the mithqiil (miskal) and the dirham (dirhem). They still use the silver muzabbaqa-fifty to the dīnār-and conduct many transactions using the riidhi, the Fatimids having changed the coinage but these two, abolishing the [brass] qit< and the miskals.
Measures: the wayba (whiba), the equivalent of fifteen manns, and the irdab (ardeb), six whibas. The tillis is eight whibas, but is no longer in use. p. 20s The customs: in the mosques of this region, when the Imam recites the morning prayer every day, he places before him a copy ofthe Qurʾān from which he reads a portion, while the people gather around him just as gather around the preachers. They also recite a call to prayer that is peculiar to themselves; it is like a wail, and is used the last third of the night, and pertaining to it is a story they are fond of telling. During the last two prayers of the day their mosque is filled with the chatter of the jurisprudents, the leaders in reading, the litterateurs, and the savants. I used to go in there with a group from Jerusalem, and we would sit and chat, and we would hear the summons from two sides: “Turn your attention to the assembly!" and we would look, and there we would be, sitting between two assemblies. It is like this in all the mosques, and I have counted in one, one hundred ten sessions. When they had performed the evening prayer, up to a third of the people would remain, and enliven the market as they returned from the mosque. You will never encounter better than the assemblies of the reciters of the Qurʾān here; here is also an assembly for the musicians. A custom of theirs consists of placing canopies outside their mosques at the time of the sermon, as at al-Basra. Their markets are empty on Fridays.
Seldom do they wear clothes that have been washed or sandals that have had the hair removed. They do not eat meat often. They make movements as they need to during the prayer, clearing their throats and their noses in the mosque, and voiding under the mats.
In the country districts the people at threshing time bake bread sufficient for their needs for the coming year; this they dry and store. They here use the winnowing machine resembling that of Syria. They are a people polite, sociable, and given to flattery. Their biggest oath is, “By God's head!" and the smallest is, “May ʿAll confirm!" They enjoy eating fish heads, and it is said that if they see a Syrian who has bought a fish they will follow him so that when he discards the head they may retrieve it. They constantly eat the dillinis (a shellfish), a most filthy thing; it is a creature between two small shells which they split open, then drink; it is like mucus.
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
174
Among their blemishes: the faintness of their hearts, the scarcity of their fruits. The Syrians constantly reproach them, and mocking them, say “the rain of the Egyptians is the dew, and their bird is the kite; their speech when they say ʿya sldl' is languid like that of women. God love you! May you be always free from such things." Their food is the dillinis, their tidbits are chickpeas, their cheese, a/-hā/ūm, consists of dried curds, their confection is the nayda, their steaks are of the pig, their oaths blasphemous.
Now, in respect of the Nile-1 have never tasted, nor have I heard that in the entire world is there water sweeter than it, except for the river al-Mansūra (Mihran). Its increase is from the month of Bawna to the month of Tot, about the time of the Festival of the Cross. Two dams there are, one of the two at ʿAyn Shams, where the canal is dammed with esparto grass and mud before the increase of the river. When the water comes the dam retains it, and the water rises on the embankment to beyond the capital; thus those villages are irrigated, such as Bahtlt, al-Munyatayn, ShabrO, and DamanhOr. This dam is that of the canal of the Commander of the Faithful. When the day of the Festival of the Cross arrives, the time at the end of the sweetening of the grapes, the Ruler goes out to ʿAyn Shams, and orders the opening of this canal, because the people on the embankment have already dammed up the mouths of the streams, so that no water escapes from them. Accordingly supervisors are put in charge, so that the water descends to all the villages of al-Rīf.
The other canal is lower down than the first one, and bigger than it; however, the Ruler does not go there. Its being opened signifies the lowering of the Nile; this happens at Sardos.
The Nilometer: a pond in the middle of which is a tall column whereon are the marks in cubits and fingers; in charge of it is a superintendent, and around it are doors that fit together tightly. A report is presented to the Ruler every day of the amount the water has risen, whereupon the herald proclaims, “God hath augmented today the blessed Nile by so much; its increase last year on this day was so much; and may God bring it to completeness!" The rise is not proclaimed until after it has reached twelve cubits, it is announced to the Ruler only, for at twelve cubits the water does not extend to the cultivated villages of the countryside. However, when the height of the water reaches fourteen cubits, the lower portion of the region is watered; but if it reaches sixteen cubits, there is a general rejoicing, for there will be a good year. Should it go above that there is fertility and abundance. When the water has gone down, the people begin ploughing and sowing. During the days of the flood of the river, Egypt is as if it were covered by the sea, so that it is not possible to go from one village to another in some areas except by rowboats.
Connected with this occurrence was an evil custom in ancient times, as I have been told by Abo Y.>sir, the guest of Ibn ʿAbd Allah al-Ansarl. He heard it from Yosufbin ʿAll, who had it from al-Maʾm0n, who had it from Muhammad
p. 206
p. 207
Aqouf ااأ3دلاوو ااأ3؛ل 3؛uaqu :SUJ3٧S ؛٧ ؛paddous s•
S31J3B3J ااأ3 3؛BjjpuBxajv JO J3pB٧‘ ٧tginou٩ ؛d JO SUE31U Aq u؛JO apEUU S3d ؛(UOJ lUEUEJ-JE؟ UEIJU ^ES اا31 OJ S31J3B3J S3U٧I٧3lUOS SUN اا31 SU3UEUJUU؛ اا31 OSJB OJIN JO SUE31U Aq ااأ3 inBjp^q؛3 ٧3٧EM pun uuauudjnba dnoaS B puEsq OABIJI SUIUJS ؛u N؛spBAOud 3I• داأ3 JO ajdoad د؛٧أ٧أل8 jnp؛3tp Iiy squuouu moj asoqu 3u؛3 J؛SUJ3٧S pvq saqsnd اا31 JO U3٧EM اا31 UUOUJ E3S اا31 ]pun 3٩E اا31 JO 33JOJ اا31 لاس aqujo pvq qsnd ااأ3 JO U3٧EM اا31 لغ؛أ3 UUOUJ اا31 3٩٩؛ UOIJM اا31 pujw tpnos ٩]SMO‘ ؛٧ ٥' ool sot اا31 pujw tpuou ٩)SMO‘ اا31 JO S3AEM اا31 pun ‘uaquo MDBS JSAO IJOJ E3S vbvqqvznw B ^SJOJS
JO SUE31U jnBjp٩؛3 nb3؛٧u3tud) ٩B٧؛3u ؛٧ E٧٧X3 ۵3A3 UOJ puB ibvttpp EjjEq UOJ dn دا31دuo insists B 3AEIJ اا31 ٩UB٩ tpilJM Aq اا31دUUOUJ U3٧EM aqvu اا31 J؛Aq J3A ؛s ؛UEUodtuau usn^ ؛؛
Jjoddns ااأ3 ؛un؛٧s داأ3 J3٧EM jno JO Ploo ؛puo3 sjqu ‘UUEUSUOD s؛٧؛sano^ JO uo ^iSBppnbnj‘ ؛u اا31 JO 33U3IJ33X3 اا31 ٧3٧EM » „لغ0ا RB UE؛،، pOQ ^BlIU,, ‘l PJES ٧tginou٩ puB uujq اأ3 UUOUJ quEup ؛٧ داأ3لأ sjBnba uno^ SUE 1, ‘31( PJES‘ ٥ puauuE OJ ااأ3 ituiiBjj-iB JO UOJSSSS ؛u ااأ3 B uaqM ‘anbsouu ؛٧3٧EM JO UE SEM ؛٧ ٧no٩E UOJ Ploo SUJEinaU pun (Ploo S3UU033٩ ^Ep 3UO paouBtp I squuouu OMU SSUOJS uoojudE paqsnjo Mouqu ajdoad ؛OUU ؛٧ UEqu OS ؛٧ S3ti٧033٩ !؛pjduu؛ J3A03J0UU دا31 JO U3٧EM اا31 J؛J3A uo ^ppnuu S3UU033٩ اا31 JO sXnp اا31 pun ‘pooy اا31 Ep Sjqu OJ uuatp āuouuB uuojsno^
uvqu OS ؛٧ B paqoESJ اأ3؛جاأاs JO؛٩no U33٧x؛qoud snqu SEq pory -s٧؛٩؛A3 uvqu p3٧؛I uo اا31 JO agtUJOUU اا31 JO (EAJUS3J اا31 .pasnvo pvq pory ‘sso اا31 J؛OJ J3A A\o٧ UOJ ‘sso٧3 ااأ3 JBd3jd tuapo pvq ajdoad؛IU3 OJ 3u؛UOIJM ung 3٧E٧3 ااأ3د 3SOUE MOB noX 3٩BU٧'؛؛ ,Mouip Jtuv ااأ3 uadvd ؛OJU ااأ3 لغ؛أ3 3٧oj3٩ ااأ3 aqujo JBAJUS3J ااأ3 ^OJ no^ sasnno uvqu ‘jojsnbuo لاس H qsE 3M uaqu؛Bx^tu!p3٧ 3٩ OJ—3٧ لاس uaqu ‘auojE jswod UMO uno^ Aq لاس oil,؛ ٧3A3M٥q ‘ji‘ ؛٧ 3٩ ااأ3 3U٠ po٥‘
JO JspuBuuuuo^ 1JBtufb ‘po٥ااأ3 OJ ‘injqujEj ااأ3 لح؛أ3 ٧dA3;ijo، uaqu MOU؛ no^ji pauado ؛٧ 33J3d pun؛uo SEM UEIJM p3A ااأ3 UUOUJ,, :uadvd JO dqs ااأ3 JO JUBAJSS Mouqu pjnoqs no^ ipitjAt ‘uadvd ؛OJU ااأ3 لغ؛أ3 ooif ااأ3 Jtuv, ‘paAjuuE U3UU3J اأ3 M jadndjo dqs B uuas؛q٧؛q u؛s ل3„3لاBS^؛js B no^ uuas 3AEIJ !„ ‘jtuv, OJ 3u؛JO d 03لل33الد؛ISJ UOJ (PIP no^ UEIJM u؟٧3A3٧EI(M sapasjsdns U٧ papaoaud ٧٧‘،، pun JBtufb OJ 3٧o٧M Jtuv, ٩؛٧٧EI^ĪE u؟٩ uo ااأ3 uauuEiu pa٧3E no^„ ‘paqdau 3٧ ujnsaj B sy 'UOJ B JOU‘ ااأ3 uo 3J3M ajdoad ااأ3 od؛٧u tu3 JO؛٧Bj3؛33s uo (3u؛ipiqAi āu pun ‘quuouu uxau ااأ3 quuouu āujMopoj‘ ٧n٩ ااأ3 لح؛أ3 A\ paMoy؛B JOU M٧ ل؛اال3 pun ISJ؟auaqu SEM UEIJM sapasjsdns U٧ og •JI 3٧oj3٩ ااأ3دpun ‘quuouu UEqu paujEM ااأ3 ا31ل ؛OJU اا31 J؛uuaqu OJ Jtuv, pjEg f J3A‘ „دا1؛8 \A؛J3A3 ‘ssnd OJ 3UU03 JOU II) 3SnB33٩ uuaqu ssajp I q٧o٩ اأ3ل ؛u ؛٧J3M3^ UU3UUJEU pun ااأ3 JSBO 3M uaqu ‘sue auaqu usaq A B J33J3S 3M؛3j؛U ة؛ل] OqAS ؛s اا31 OJ UJ0٩٧Sjy ا31ل 3SU3dlIU033J 3M pUB ‘sjusand ؛MDitjAS unoqujM UOJUIPBUU u ؛٧ \A؛JOU II u. AS0٧ ااأ3 qujjaMU ٧أ؛3اأاquuouu Sjqujo اا31دPJES: „٠لأا J٥؛pjB33J (33U؛auaqu sanojo OJIN sjqu 3u ؛po٩u٧3 33J٧3E٧d B s؛p3 JU٧Vj OJ 3UUE3 ٩؛mp S٧J-|E u؛3u اا31 33٩؛uu؛JO 3u ااأ3 pun BUMBg JO quuouu s^EQ UUOUJ ٩؛njj-iB u؛؛؟؛' ٧dX33 UOIJAS uvqu SUU33S UJ psjanbuoo SEM‘ ؛ajdoad SJ ٩؛PEM OIJAS ‘jejei^ u ؛1 ٥٩v tuOJJ S؟pvq OtJAS ‘l٧I ؛٧ U٩I UUOUJ qE٦؛pvq OtJAS ‘Ej ؛٧
(LdAOa) 1ةلا JO NOI٥a« 3HL
اءة
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
176
In the Nile is an animal called the crocodile; it resembles the lizard. Its head is one third of its body. Weapons are of no avail against it except under the axilla; its mouth will snatch a person. Most of those seen are in Upper Egypt and Sardūs, so that among the proverbs there is, “Beware of Sardūs, even if the water is merely a jarful," the jar meaning the small jug on a waterwheel. One day I was aboard a ship near Sardūs, and it scraped something, so I said, “Is it bottom we scraped?" I was told no, but rather the back of a crocodile.
The Nile used not reach to al-Fayyūm, so the people complained to Joseph-peace be on him-about it. He built a great dam in the river, and at the bottom of it he installed valves in ducts of glass. The dam retained the water, so that it rose until it reached the ground of al-FayyOm, and irrigated it. At present it is the most watered area in Egypt--do you not see that there are the farms of rice, or do you not notice the burden ofits land taxes, the greatness of its income? During its flood the water goes over the top of the dam; so sometimes they allow the boats to go over with the flow, and they glide down safely, though sometimes they capsize and turn upside down. When the people no longer need the water, the valves are opened and the water subsides.
All the wells that are close to the Nile are sweet, while those some distance away from it are disagreeable. The best baths are those by the shore. Entering through the town are canals from which they draw their water by means ofwater wheels. On the Nile itself also are numerous wheels which irrigate the gardens when the river is low. The water at al-FayyOm is unhealthy because it flows over the rice farms.
A saying of theirs is to the effect that the kid goat as soon as it is born says, “Get out, foreigners." At Alexandria is found a striped fish called the sharb [stockfish]; whoever eats of it sees terrible dreams, unless he is of those who p. 209 drink wine, in which case it will not hurt him. At al-Farama is found a bird called a/-sumāni (quail), of which whoever eats sickens, and suffers crampness in his joints. A person in al-Fustat who continually eats fish is afflicted with a severe mange which does not leave him for seven years.
In Egypt is a mountain wherein is a gold mine; they possess, too, sources of vitriol the like of which you do not see elsewhere, and a clay called tafl (fullers). In the Muqattam hills are quarries of very fine white stone which may be sawn as wood is sawn.
Places of veneration in this region. Some commentators say that “height of land, a sheltered place with a water spring" (Quran, sūra 23, v. 50), is Egypt, and that Jesus and Mary were there for some time. Mount Sinai is near the Red Sea; one approaches it from a village called al-Amn (Elim). This is the place by which Moses and the children of Israel departed, and here are twelve springs of water ofrather middling quality. The Mount is about two days journey from Elim. On it is a monastery belonging to the Christians, many farms, and an olive tree believed to be that of which God said, “it is neither of the east nor of the west"
177
THE REGION OF MISR (EGYPT)
(Quriin, sūra 24, v. 35): the olive oil from it is delivered to the rulers. In al-Fustat is the spot in which Joseph-peace be upon him-was sold; in the hills of al-Muqattam are locations whither people like to repair, and places of retreat to which they betake themselves on Friday nights. Within shouting distance of al-Fustat is a place called al-Qaraff wherein is a mosque with handsome drinking fountains; here too is an assemblage of worshippers, also a place of seclusion-it is a market for those who seek the next world. There is, too, a very fine central mosque. The cemeteries here are the most beautiful possible architecturally-you see the town with its dusty colour, while the cemeteries are white. These stretch the length of the capital, and include the grave of al-Shāfiʿ! between those of al-Maznl and Abū Ishaq al-Marwazl. There is too, by the Red Sea, the spot from which the children of Israel entered the sea. Close by Sardūs is the mosque of al-Khidhr, on whom be peace! As to TIh Bani Israʾil [the wilderness associated with the children of Israel] about this there is controversy; however, it lies, in fact, between Egypt and Syria, stretches about forty farsakhs, p. 210 and consists of sands, saltflats, and sandstone: however, some date palms and springs occur there. One boundary reaches al-Jifar, another Mount Sinai; the boundary of the desert is the countryside towards the Red Sea, while the boundary with Syria corresponds with their high road to Makka.
Among the remarkable things in this region are al-Haraman (the two pyramids), which are one of the wonders of the world. Of stone, and resembling two edifices, they rise, each, to a height of four hundred cubits-the cubit of King Khusraw-its width the same. They are covered with Greek inscriptions, and within both of them are two passages to the highest part of each; there is, too, a remarkable vaulted passageway underground, excavated in the sand. Varying accounts have been given me about both structures, some saying that they are both talismans, others that they were the granaries of Joseph; others say no, rather, they are their burial grounds. I have read in the book of Ibn al-Faqlh that they are both bequeathed to the sand. It is said, moreover, that on both of them is written: “I built them both, and whoever claims power in his possession of them let him destroy them both; for destroying is easier than building." One of the kings purposed to destroy them both, but the revenue of Egypt did not suffice to do that, so he left them both. They are both smooth like big buildings, and may be seen from a distance of two or three days journey. One does not ascend them unless he is agile. Around about them both is a number of small similar structures, and this indicates that they are graves. Do you not notice about the kings of al-Daylam in al-Rayy, how they have, in imitation, put tall domes over their graves? They made them as strong and as high as they could, so that they would not be obliterated. There are even smaller than these lesser ones. Here also is an idol which some assert Satan used to take possession of and make to speak, with the result that he broke its nose and its lips.
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
178
At ʿAyn Shams are what look like two tall minarets. A single piece of stone is at the top of each one, pointed like a spearhead: they are called the obelisks. p. 211 Here are also lesser objects of the same style. Concerning the two larger ones I have heard reports which intelligence will not accept. Moreover, I have read in the book of talismans that these two are talismans pertaining to the crocodiles, and this is conceivable; for do you not notice that the crocodiles in the district of al-Fustat do not do any hurt, despite their size and great number? In al-Fustat, at Qasr al-Shamʿ is an image of a deformed woman on whose head is a basin made of stone; it is said that she was a washerwoman for the family of the Pharaohs, but she harmed Moses and was deformed. On the main road to Upper Egypt are buildings called al-Barabi [the Temple Ruins] in which are numerous images. In them, and in the two pyramids are many ornaments and drawings. At Hulwan are remarkable caves, really dreadful, in which a person may easily lose his way. Within them is said to be a way to the Red Sea, smoothed as though the salt water flowed over it.
The lighthouse of Alexandria has its foundations firmly anchored in a small peninsula, and may be approached by a narrow road. It is firmly set in the rock, and the water rises on the lighthouse on the west side. The same is true of the fortress of the city, except that the lighthouse is on a peninsula on which are three hundred buildings, to some of which a mounted horseman may go; he may go to all of them using a password. The lighthouse is elevated above all the towns along the shore, and it is said that there used to be a mirror there in which could be seen every ship taking off from the shores of the entire sea. A custodian continuously attends to it every day and night, and as soon as a ship comes into his range of sight he notifies the commander, who dispatches the birds that go to the shore, that those there may be in a state of readiness. On one occasion the Romaean Dog [the Roman Emperor] sent a person who exercised guile and subtlety, so that he was appointed custodian ofthe lighthouse; then, it is said, he took the mirror away with him, but according to others, rather, that he broke it and threw it into the sea. In the book of talismans it is said that the lighthouse was built as a charm to prevent the water of the sea from covering the land of Egypt, so the Romaean Dog intrigued to destroy the top of it because of this, but he did not succeed. In al-Jifar is a talisman so that the sands will not cover the towns and the villages. It is supposed that the talismans are found only in Egypt and Syria, and are said to have been made by the prophets; however, I myself saw talismans in Fars also.
The names of the Coptic months are: first the winter months: Tūt, in which p. 212 occurs Nayrūz [New Year's Day], Babih, HatOr, Kihak, Tūba, Amshlr. The summer months: Baramhat, Barmūda, Bashans, Baʾūna, Abib, Misra.
As for the situation of Egypt; the Romaean Sea is on its northern border, the Sea of China flows by two thirds of its eastern border, and these two thirds
179
THE REGION OF MISR (EGYPT)
constitute five sections of the region: a section between the sea and the Mountain-this is dry; the second section is the mountain of al-Muqattam; the third section is al-Saʿld, including the Nile and the territories on it. The fourth section is also a mountain, beyond which is the expanse containing al-Wahat (the Oases).
The length of Egypt from the Romaean Sea to al-Nūba (Nubia) is less than a month's journey. Its width in the south is a distance of eight stages, in the north, twelve stages. The distance along the inlet which is part of the Red Sea is four stages.
The government is in the hands of the house of the Fatimids, and the people live in justice and security, because he is a ruler powerful and rich, and his subjects live in prosperity. Here is administration and execution of the law; and everyone who hears the ruler obeys him, in full confidence, whether privately or publicly. The sermon at the noon service on Friday is addressed to the AmIr al-Muʾminln, (The Commander of the Faithful) solely.
As for the income of Egypt- have read in the Book of Tribute ofQudama bin Jaʿfar to the effect that the income of Egypt from property is two million five hundred thousand dinars. I have read otherwise in the book oflbn al-Faqlh, who at great length reports its income in the time of Pharaoh, then in the time of al-Hajjaj, then in the time of the dynasty ofal-ʿAbbas, and he refers to it as a land tax. I enquired of an Egyptian in Bukhara about the land tax, and he said that in Egypt there is no land tax, but that the fallah declares his intention to use the land, whereupon he is granted its use by the ruler, and he cultivates it. When he has reaped, threshed and aggregated the grain, it is demarcated by piles, and left there. On this the treasurer and the secretary of the ruler go out and determine the amount of the crop to be paid as rent for the land; what remains is given to the fallah. He said, moreover, that among them is a custom that should a person take from the ruler some additional land on contract, there is accordingly an increase for him in the land rent proportional to the amount he has taken. I said that in that case, then, no one held possession of the property on which he was. No, indeed, said he, except in the case of a person who had bought land from one to whom the ruler had apportioned it in former times, and had granted it when he, or his family needed the money for it: in such a case he offered it for sale to the public. I asked if this is why it is said that the land of Egypt is not owned because the people made a contract for it with Joseph, on whom be peace! He said that this is pure nonsense. “Do you not know," said he, “that Islam superseded everything that was before its time, or do you not know that Joseph--o whom be peace-restored to the people their property when Egypt regained its fertility. And one thing more, the people reached this settlement with the Muslims at the time of the conquest." Said I, “Why did they not make a settlement as they did with the people of Syria, since both countries were taken
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
180
p. 213 by force?" Said he, “Syria is a country where it rains every year and agriculture is not interrupted there, although at times it is fertile, and at times suffers from drought. But as for Egypt, its dependence is on the Nile; some years it does not flood as much as other years, some years it rises to fourteen or even sixteen cubits, sometimes even more than that. This matter of its flow constitutes a harsh disparity between the two situations; and if a regular land tax were imposed it would have to be collected from the man who is able to cultivate in any year, and the man who is not."
The imposts are heavy especially at Tinnls and Dimyat, and on the banks of the Nile. The Copts may not weave any at all oftheir superb cotton cloth known by the name of al-Shatawiyya [made in Shata], unless they have the certificate stamped with the seal of the ruler; neither may they sell it except through brokers, to whom the transaction, by contract, is assigned. The deputy of the ruler records what is sold, in his register; it is then taken to someone who folds the cloth, then to someone who packs it in straw, then to someone who packs it in a basket, then to one who puts it in a wrapping-at every step a fee is charged. Moreover, at the gate to the docks another levy is exacted. Every dealer writes his sign on the basket, and the ships are inspected at sailing time.
At Tinnls an impost of a dinar is laid on a skin of oil, and a like amount on similar commodities. Moreover, on the bank of the Nile at al-Fustat the taxes are heavy. On the shore at TinnIs I saw a tax collector in his office, and it is said that the tax income at this place every day is a thousand dinars, with a like computation on the seashore in al-Saʿld and on the coast at Alexandria. Moreover, at Alexandria there is a tax on ships from the west, and at al-Farama on ships from Syria; at al-Qulzum there is an impost of a dirham on every shipload.
Addition/version MS . c.
The imposts here are heavy. One may not weave any cloth of the excellent Shatilwl variety, or any coloured cloth without having the prior approval for it stamped with the seal of the ruler, and it may not be traded except in the presence of the representative of the ruler. It is then taken to a depot to be rolled there, then to another place to be bundled in wicker, then to another place, there to be packed: to the officials at every one of these places a tax must be paid. Moreover, at the coast half a dirham is levied on every bundle, then at every harbour through which it is shipped, another tax is levied. At Tinnls, on every skin of olive oil there is a levy of a diniir, and there, one encounters very close inspection, and heavy exactions. Indeed, sometimes the very choicest of the goods being exported may be taken to the ruler, who purchases them at whatever price he pleases to give, even though such dealings are oppressive.
The distances in this region: from al-Farama to al-Baqqara, one stage; thence to al-Warrada, one stage;
181
THE REGION OF MISR (EGYPT)
p. 214 thence to al-ʿArlsh, one stage; thence to Rath, one stage.
You go in the summer from al-Faramil to Jurjlr, one stage; thence to FilqDs, one stage;
and in the winter from al-Faramil to al-Rassad, one stage; thence to FilqDs, one stage.
You may go from al-Faramil by water to Tinnls, one stage; thence to Dimyilt, one stage; thence to al-Mahalla al-Kablra, one stage; thence to Alexandria, two stages.
You may go from Dimyilt to Sardns, one stage; thence to al-Fustilt, one stage.
You may go from Bilbays to al-Mansaf, one stage; thence to al-Qulzum, a like distance.
You may go from al-Faramil to Dayr al-Nasilril, which is on the coast, one stage; thence to al-Mukhlasa one stage; thence to al-ʿArlsh, one stage; and from Bilbays to al-Fustilt, one stage.
You may go from Alexandria to al-Rafaqa, one stage; thence to Knm Sharlk, one stage; thence to Tarnnt, one stage; thence to Dhilt al-Silllsil, one stage; thence to al-Fustilt, one stage.
You may go from Alexandria to Bnmlnah, one stage; thence to Safil, one stage; thence to Armasil, two post stages; thence to Dhilt al-Humilm, one stage.
You may go from Alexandria to al-Ghildhara, one stage; thence to FilqOs, one stage. p. 21s You may go from al-Fustilt to Bilbays, one stage; thence to al-Mansaf one stage; thence to al-Qulzum, one stage.
From al-Qulzum to Judda by sea is a journey of from twenty-five to sixty days, depending on the wind; it is a distance of three hundred farsakhs.
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
182
You may go from al-Jubb to al-Buwayb, one stage;
thence to Manzil Ibn Bunduqa (Ibn Sadaqa), one stage;
thence to ʿAjarūd, one stage;
thence to al-Madlna, one stage;
thence to al-KursI, one stage;
thence to al-Hafr, one stage;
thence to Wayla, one stage.
From Aswan to ʿAydhab is a safe road, but I will not describe it.
The Region of the Maghrib (Northern Africa West ofEf; Andalusia)
This is a splendid region, extensive and distinguished. It is possessed of many towns and villages, remarkable in its resources and abundance. It has important border towns with many fortresses; here too, are delightful gardens. Here, also, is a number ofseparated tracts-islands, as it were-as Andalusia, distinguished and marvelous, Tilhart, so pure and delightful, Tanja, that town so remote, and Sijilmilsa, the favorite and incomparable place; also Isqiliyya (Sicily), the profitable island, of which the inhabitants are continually engaged in the Holy Strife. Moreover, wealth here is on a solid base, and cities here comparable with al-Basra are many. The people seek what is good; the ruler is just, wise, and well respected. This region adjoins the sea, the very best of neighbours! The inhabitants are gracious towards everyone who traverses the region.
The cities of this region are concealed from view by olive trees, the ground covered with fig trees and vineyards; streams make their way through it, trees fill the lowland valleys. However, some of its areas are remote, much of it is desert, the roads are difficult and dangers many. Situated in a remote corner of the realm oflsl.>m, part ofit is intercepted from the rest by the sea. No one wants to go there, no one goes there, no one enquires of it, and no one speaks well ofit. It has produced no scholar of renown, no celebrated ascetic, except, perhaps, for a very few. The people are louts, though blameless before God; they are misers, even though prosperous. Here is a pattern and representation of it. [Map IX]
We have considered the Maghrib and al-Andalus in the same manner as we have Haytal and Khurasan, with the exception that we did not enter al-Andalus so as to be able to determine its territorial divisions. The first district as one comes from Egypt is Barqa; following that, Ifriqiya, then T.>hart, then Sijilmasa, then Fils, next al-Sūs al-Aqsil; the island of Sicily, which faces Ifriqiya, then al-Andalus beyond the sea, in the territory of the Romaeans. Fils consists of two divisions, Tanja and al-Zilb. Barqa is the name of the district, and also of its principal seat. Among its towns are Dhilt al-Humilm, Ramilda, Atrilbulus, Ajdilbiya, Sabra, Qabis, Ghafiq.
Ifriqiya has for its capital al-Qayrawan, and among its towns are: Sabra, Asfaqus, al-Mahdiyya, Sūsa, Tūnis, Banzard, Tabarqa, Marsa al-Kharaz, Bona, Baja, Lurbus, Qrna, Marnlsa, Mas, Banjad, Marm.>janna, Sablba, Qamūda, Qafsa, Qastlliya, Nafz.>wa, Lafis, Awdhana, Qalanus, Qablsha, Rusfa, Banūnush, Lajam, Jazlrat Abi Sharik, Bagh.>y, Sūq Ibn Khalaf, Dūfana, al-Maslla, Ashlr, Sūq Hamza, Jazlrat Bani Zaghannaya, Mattlja, Tanas, Dar (Hāz?), Sūq Ibr.>hlm, al-Ghuzza, Qlʿat Burjuma, B.>ghir, Yalal, Jabal Zalagh, Asf.>qus, Munastlr, Marsa al-Hajjamln, Banzart, Tabarqa, Hayyaja, Baghir, Ghaybath, Qaryat al-Saqaliba, Lurbus, Marsa al-Hajar, Jamūnas al-Sabūn١ Taras, Qstlliya, Nafta, Bantiyūs, Taqiyos, Madlnat a!-Qusūr, Miskiy.>na, Baghay, Dūf.>na, ʿAyn al-ʿAsaflr, Dar
p. 216
p. 217
p. 21s
/VlTUt •mm )tjtr	ب٠ءم،امج٠۶\
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
184
■/
فرا٠د
بط ر
ءص٠
أ١د
١٠١
=:;؛ذتر٠٢لج٣ض
Map IX: Al-Maghrib (see p. 413).
From MS. Sprenger 5—Ahlwardt 6034 by kind permission of the Staatsbibliothek Preussischer Kulturbesitz, Berlin, Orientabteilung.
185
THE REGION OF THE MAGHRIB
Malūwwal, Tubna, Maqqara, Tljis, Madlnat al-Mahriyyln, Tiimasnat, Dakkama, Qasr al-Ifrlqi, Rakwa, al-Qustantlnlyya, Mila, Jljil, Tabarrlt, Sauf, Ikija, Marsa al-Dajjaj, Ashlr.
As for the district of Tahart-and this name is that of its chief city-it has among its towns: Yammama, Taghllsiya, Qalʿat Ibn al-Harb, Hazara, al-JaCba, Ghadlr al-Durūʿ, Lamaya, Mindas, Sūq Ibn Habla, Matm.>ta, Jabal Tujan, Wahran, Shalif, Tlr, al-Ghuzza, Sūq Ibrahim, Rahbaya, al-Batha, al-Zaytūna, p. 219 Tamama, Yaʿod, al-Khadhraʾ, Warlfan, Tanas, Qasr al-Fulfls, Bahriyya, Soq Kar.>, Manjasa, Ozikl, Tabrln, Sūq Ibn Mablūl, Ruba, Tawllt Abl Maghūl Tamazzlt, another Tawllt (Laghwa), Fakkan.
Sijilmasa is also the name of the chief seat of the district, and its towns are: Darʿa, Tadanqūst, Athar, Ayla, Wllmls, Hisn Ibn S.>lih, al-Nahhasln, Hisn al-Sūd.>n, Hilal, Imsala, Dar al-Amlr, Hisn Barara, al-Khiy.>mat, Tazrūt.
As for F.>s, the offspring of the inhabitants are wastrels. F.>s is the name of the chief seat, too, while the district is also named al-Sūs al-Adna. The towns here are: al-Basra, Zalūl, al-Jahid, Soq al-Kut.>m!, Wargha, Sabo, Sanhaja, p. 220 Haww.>ra, Tlz.>, Matmilta, Kazannaya, Sala, Madlnat Bani Qarbas, Mazh.>hiyya, Azlla, Sabta, Balad Ghum.>r, Qalʿat al-Nusūr١ Nakūr, Balash, Marnlsa, Tabarlda, Saʿ, Miknasa, Qalʿat Shamlt, Madaʾin, Burjan Ozikl, Tayūnū, Maksln, Amlll, Amlah Abi al-Hasan, Qastlna (Qastlliya?), Nafzawa, Niqawus, Biskara, Qablsha, Madlnat Bani Zahhlq, Luwatat ʿAbd Allah, Luw.>tat Barkiyya, Akdh.>r Ibn Shirak, Madlnat Jabal Zalagh.
The subdivision of this area of Tanja has these towns: Wallla, Madraka, P. 221 Matrnka, Zaqqor, Ghuzza, Ghumira, al-Hajir, T.>jarajara, al-Baydhaʾ, al-Khadhril.
Al-Zab has as its capital al-Maslla, and towns: Maqqara, Tubna, Biskara, Badis, Tahūdha, Tawlaqa, Jamlla, Bantiyos, Adna, Ashlr.
As for al-Sos al-Aqsa: its capital is Tarfana, and it has the towns Aghmat Wayla [Aylan], [Aghmat] Warlka, Tandall, Milssa, and others.
The capital of Sicily is Balarm (Palermo); its chief towns are al-Khalisa, Atrabunush, Mazar, ʿAyn al-Mughatt.>, Qalʿat al-Ballūt, Jirjant, Buthlra, Saraqūsa, Lantlnl, Qataniya, al-Yaj, Batarnū, Tabarmln, Mlqush, Masslna, p. 222 Rimta, Damannash, Jaras, Qabet al-Qawarib, Qalʿat al-Sirat, Qalʿat Abl Thawr, Batarliya, Thirma, Būrqad, Qurliyon, Qrlnash, Bartinlq, Akhyas, Balja, Bartanna.
Al-Andalus corresponds somewhat to Haytal in the area of al-Mashriq; however we did not travel through its domains so that we could enumerate its provinces, neither did we go through it so to define its territorial divisions. It is said to have a dimension of one thousand miles, and Ibn Khurradadhbih says: “Forty towns constitute al-Andalus," referring of course to those that are well known, because no one has anticipated us in detailing the districts and recording the capitals. Some of the cities he mentions are capitals, according to our classification. I enquired of one of the intelligent men from there about the rural districts surrounding Qurtuba (Cordoba) and that are linked with it, and the
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
186
towns of these districts. Said he: “We call a rustiiq (rural area) iqlim (a region); and there are thirteen iqlims around Qurtuba with their cities," and he named Arjuna, Qstalla, Shawdhar, Martush, Qanbanush, Fajj Ibn Laqlt, Balat Marwan, p. 223 Hisn Bulkona, al-Shanlda, Wadi ʿAbd Allah, Qarsls, al-Maʾida, Jayyan; and as the suffix denotes, this last name indicates a district, its chief towns being: aljafr, Bayghu, Martush, Qant, Gharnata, Mantisha, Bayyasa. The other well-known cities of al-Andalus are: TurtOsha, Balansiya, Mursiya, Bajjana, p. 224 Maliqa, Jazirat Jabal Tariq, Shadhuna, Ishbiliya, Ukhshunuba, Mariyya, Shantarln, Baja, Labla, QarmUna, MawrUr, Istija.
Barqa is an important capital, well built and prosperous. It has an abundance of fruit and other agricultural products, and honey; and life there is easy. This is a frontier town surrounded by mountains, which are well populated and farmed. It lies half a stage distant from the sea, situated in a basin, and the soil all around there is red. The inhabitants derive their drinking water from wells, and from what they retain of rainwater in cisterns. Barqa lies on the main road to Egypt. The people here are kindly towards strangers; of good and upright stock, they are less capricious than others.
Atrabulus (Tripoli) is a large maritime city, walled in stone and lime, having gates: of the Sea, the East, the North, and the West. The inhabitants have their drinking water from wells and rainwater. It is rich in fruits, pears, apples, dairy products, honey. Its fame is widespread.
Ajdabiya is a flourishing place, built of stone, on the sea-coast. The inhabitants derive their drinking water from the rains. The same may be said of Surt (Sirte); both these places are on a watercourse, and are surrounded by desert scrub.
Sabratha (Sabra), situated in the desert, is fortified, having palm trees and figs. The inhabitants have their drinking water from the rain; Qabis (Gabes) is smaller than Tripoli; here is a fast-flowing stream. Their buildings are of stone and burnt brick. Here is an abundance of palms, grapes, and apples. The town is walled, and with three gates; the hinterland is peopled by Berbers.
Ghafiq is an extensive area with many villages: markets are held there on Friday. It is a maritime area and some people associate it with the region of IfrIqiya.
Dhat al-Humam is a city of recent foundation, and I learned from a person who had asked Abu al-ʿAbbas ibn al-RaʿI concerning it, that its buildings are one of the signs of the conquest of Egypt by the Fatimids.
Al-Qayrawan (Kayrouan) is the metropolis of its region [Ifriqiya]; it is a delightful, expansive place, where the bread is very good, the meats excellent; it p. 22s produces fruits of every diverse kind. It adjoins plain, mountain, sea. It has great prosperity and learning, and remarkable lowness of price: for a dirham, one can buy five manns of meat or ten of figs, and you need not ask about its raisins, dates, grapes, and olive oil! It is the point of departure of travelers going west, and is the center of commerce for the two seas. One will not find an area having more
187
THE REGION OF THE MAGHRIB
towns, or more agreeable people than its inhabitants. There are none other than Hanafites and Malikites here, and between them remarkable harmony-no discord, no factionalism. Without a doubt, they are instructed by the light of their God, accepting discomfort, and their hearts do not know revenge. This town is the glory of the Maghrib, the seat of power, and one of the pillars of the realm. It is more gracious than Naysabūr, longer than Damascus, more splendid than Isbahan.
Yet their water is inferior in quality, culture is scant, nor do you find elegance there. The water is stored in tanks. Imposts are levied on those who own shops, so they make their living in Sabra; hence the markets ofthe metropolis are abandoned. The populace is like a flock of stray sheep. They do not recite the tarawih: in fact, neither of the two sects [Hanafiyya and Shafiʿiyya] has much influence there.
This city is a little less than three miles in either dimension, and is unwalled. The inhabitants keep their drinking water in large earthen vessels, and cisterns in which the rainwater is collected. Al-Muʿizz made a canal for them, which, coming from the mountains, fills the cisterns after going by his palace in Sabra. Their buildings are of clay and brick, and there are numerous large earthen vessels for olive oil. The congregational mosque is at a place called al-Simat al-Kabir, in the center of the markets, in the heart of the city. It is bigger than the congregational mosque of Ibn Taylūn, and with columns of marble, is paved with marble tiles. Its drain pipes are of lead, and it has the following entrances: Bab al-Simat (emporium), Bab al-Sarrafln (cambists), Bab al-Rahadina (flax merchants), Bab al-Fudhūliyyln (cloth merchants), Bab al-Maʾdhana (minarets), Bab al-SabbaghIn (dyers), Bab al-HawwariyyIn (clothes cleaners), Bab Sūq al-Khamls (Thursday market), Bab al-Maydhat (fountains for ablution); a special gate for the datesellers; also Bab al-LahhamIn (butchers), and Sūq al-RammahIn (the spearmakers’ market).
The main thoroughfares through the city are fifteen in number: Darb p. 226 al-Rabīʿ, Darb ʿAbd Allah, Darb Tūnis, Darb Asram, Darb Aslam, Darb Sūq al-Ahad (Sunday market), Darb Nafiʿ, Darb al-Hadhdhaʾiyyin (shoemakers).
Sabra was built by the Fatimid [khalif al-MansOr Ismaʿll, died in the year 341/953], immediately on his taking possession of this region; and its name is derived from the endurance [sabr] of his soldiers in war. It is rounded like a cup, and there is not another place like it. The ruler's palace is in the centre of the city, just as in Baghdad, and water runs through the middle of it. Very well populated, it has excellent markets within which stands the congregational mosque of the ruler. The width of the wall is twelve cubits, and it is separated from the buildings of the city, for between them and it is a space the width of a highway. The merchants go back and forth between the capital and Sabra, mounted on Egyptian asses. The gates of the town are: Bab al-FutOh (triumphs); Bab Zawlla; Bab Wadi 'l-Qassarln (valley of the fullers); they are all reinforced with iron. The walls are of burnt brick jointed with lime.
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
188
Asfaqus (Sfax) and Sūsa (Sousse) are both maritime towns, each encircled by walls of lime and stone. The inhabitants derive their drinking water from wells and cisterns.
Al-Mahdiyya is on the seacoast, surrounded by a wall of stone and lime. The drinking water here is from wells, and cisterns of rainwater. It is the granary of al-Qayrawan, the entrepot of Sicily and of Egypt. It is a flourishing well-peopled place, and anyone wishing to see al-Qustantlniyya (Constantinople) need only go to al-Mahdiyya and not take the trouble to journey to the Romaean city: in fact it does resemble it, being built on a peninsula, so it may be approached by one access only, just like a trap.
Banzard (Bizerta) is a walled town, its buildings of stone; the mosque is in the centre of the town. A stream of salty water runs through there, entering from a lake close to the sea, and to which it returns; people cross it in skiffs.
Tabarqa is a maritime town dominated by a mountain. Its stronghold has been destroyed, and the people live on the outskirts. They derive their drinking water from wells. A salt stream runs through the town.
Marsa al-Kharaz, a town on a peninsula, is situated on the seacoast, and may be entered at one place only. Coral is gathered here, there being no other source of this substance, which originates in the sea here, only.
Bona (BOne) is a maritime walled town, possessing an iron mine. The inhabitants derive their drinking water from wells.
Baja is situated between al-Qayrawan and the sea; it is rich in grains and agricultural products. In the middle of the town is a spring well that constantly flows.
Lurbus is at the foot ofJabal Bnragh; it has acreages of saffron. It is encircled by a wall ofstone; the inhabitants derive their drinking water from wells. Around this town and around Baja are markets and meeting places it would take too long to mention.
Qarna is so called from the name of a sweetwater stream that flows through it: it is encircled by a wall of stone.
MarnIsa is unwalled. The buildings are of clay, the drinking water obtained from wells. Many villages pertain to it in an extensive rural district.
Qmūda is an important country district, its chief town Jamūnas al-Sabūn. The inhabitants make their buildings of clay, and derive their drinking water from wells. The area is rich in figs, olives, almonds. It contains an important village named Khawr al-Kaf.
Marmajanna is a large place, in the administrative district of Tabassa. The drinking water of the inhabitants is from wells; there is an abundance of fruit.
Qalanus is a town in the rural district named Maknat Abi Mansūr: rich in figs, olives, and other agricultural products.
Qabisha is a country district, its chieftown, Tarnabasa (Taqerbast?). There are many people of the tribe of Banu al-ʿAbbas here, and they have taken over
in.؟
189
THE REGION OF THE MAGHRIB
the area. It produces excellent quinces, has an abundance of olives and figs. The inhabitants get their drinking water from wells.
Rusfa is a country district, the name of its chief city, Banonush, which resembles al-Ramla. The inhabitants derive their drinking water from wells. Here are three hundred sixty olive presses; their buildings are of clay.
JazIrat AbI SharIk is in the sea. It comprises twelve rural districts; the name of its chief town is Manzil Bilsho. Unwalled; the buildings are of clay. The people draw their drinking water from wells, from which their farms are irrigated, just as at ShlrilZ and Sarakhs.
Bilghily is a large walled town at the foot of a mountain called Awrils (AurOs), whence the water flows to it. It has many gardens.
Soq Hamza is a town situated on the plain. The inhabitants construct their houses of clay, and derive their water from streams and springs.
[Marsa al-Dajjilj is a town situated on the seacoast. The inhabitants build in baked brick, and derive their drinking water from a stream and some springs-conjectural restoration by de Goeje to Arabic text].
JazIrat Bani Zagannilya (Alger), on the seacoast, is walled; one sets out from here going to al-Andalus. Springs provide the drinking water.
MattIja is situated in pasture land. The people have a supply of running water on which mills are constructed; a branch of the river enters the houses; numerous gardens.
Hayilja has the same name as its rural area, which is extensive; it produces a lot of wheat.
Al-Qustantlniyya (Constantine) is a pre-Islamic city two days journey from the metropolis.
Were it not for the risk of boredom, and the lengthening of my book, I should have described the remaining cities of Ifriqiya and most of the chief towns of the districts of all the realm of Islam. However, as we are inclined to succinctness, we mention only what is indispensable. I know of no area that has more settlements than this, all well populated and first rate. We happen to mention some towns that are smaller than many villages in other regions, but which are widely known as towns. My scholarship is, of course, based on general usage. Do you not see that Mukhil, al-JilmiC;tyn, and al-Munlfa are indisputably towns, while Kafarsallam, Qasr al-Rīh, and Raʾs al-Tin, though bigger than they, are incontestably villages. You should know that an area does not become illustrious by the number of its settlements, but rather by the importance of its rural districts. Consider, for example, the importance ofNaysilbūr and Bukhilra, despite the fewness of their towns, and the wretchedness of Zabld and Hajar despite the multiplicity of the settlements of both those areas.
Tahart has a principal seat of the same name; it is the Balkh of the Maghrib. Streams surround it, trees enclose it, and it disappears in the midst of its gardens; springs well up around about it. The region is important because of Tahart: the stranger is refreshed here, and the intelligent traveler finds it
p. 22s
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
190
agreeable. Some give it preference over Damascus-however, they err; or over Cordoba-but I do not think they are correct. It is a large city, prosperous, extensive, agreeable, with attractive markets, flowing water aplenty, good people; it is of ancient foundation, solidly built, and of truly remarkable appearance. p. 229 However, when the Maghrib is compared to Syria, where in the realm of Islam is a city the like of Damascus! Similarly Cordoba has a famous name and is important.
Tahart has two mosques built of stone and lime, occupying two thirds of the town, close to the market places. Of its main streets there are four well-known: Bab Majjana, Darb al-Maʿsūma, Darb Harat al-Faqlr, Darb al-Basatln. Near Tahart is a town called [Wadi] al-Ruha, in ruins.
Tanas is a walled town, situated on the sea coast; the drinking water of the inhabitants is taken from a river; similarly, Qasr al-Fulūs.
Tahart al-Sufla (Lower) is in a large wadi; it has springs and gardens.
Fakkan is a walled town in a wadi with a flowing stream; it has gardens.
Yalal and Jabal TOjan are the same as we have just described.
Wahran (Oran) is a maritime town, walled, one takes off from here for al-Andalus, a passage of a day and a night.
Sabta (Ceuta) is situated on the Strait of Gibraltar; one may see the two lands from here, which is one of the best-known crossing points.
Jabal Zalagh is a settlement on a high mountain which overlooks the district of Fas. Khalūfbin Ahmad al-Muʿtali built it. As for the remaining towns, most of them are walled, and have gardens.
Fas consists of two important and extensive settlements, each one of them fortified. Flowing between the two is a rapid stream on which are gardens and mills. The Fatimids have taken possession of one part of it, the Umayyads the other. How many wars, and killings and triumphs have been there! The buildings in both sections are clay, the fortifications of brick. Here is to be found Qlʿat (the fortress of) Shamlt built by Ibn al-Būr!; another stands on the river, built by Ibn Ahmad. This area produces an abundance of agricultural products, p. 230 figs, and olives. Yet, they are, as you see, in great distress from the wars. They are crude and ignorant people, scholars are few, but disturbances frequent.
Qastlliya is without doubt the counterpart of al-Basra in this world. A camel load of dates is to be had for two dirhams. The inhabitants avail themselves of a large stream which disappears among the palms. No need to ask about the multiplicity of its gardens! Much the same is at Nafzawa. Both these places are at some distance from the sea.
Al-Basra used to be a large, flourishing, and important town; now reduced to ruins.
Niqawus is a lovely attractive town with an abundance of water and walnuts, but it is cold.
Balad Ghumar is in a country district that takes three days to traverse its length or its width; its entire area encompasses many prosperous villages.
191
THE REGION OF THE MAGHRIB
Qastlliya has an abundance of dates, just as we have said about Qabis (Gabes); a camel load may be had for two dirhams. The inhabitants have a large stream at their disposal.
Similarly Nafzilwa and Biskara are two places with palms and streams.
Niqilwus is cold; it is the district of walnuts and mountain fruits.
The residence of the Amlrs of Fils appointed by the Filtimids is at Jabal Zillilgh. The name of the quarter of Fils which they occupy is ʿldwat al-Qarawl, that of the other, MadInat al-AndalusI, which the Umayyads built, after crossing the sea and taking possession of Fils. All the other towns are prosperous.
Between Fils and Silʿ is an important and pleasant town; it has abundant trees and flowing streams. It is in the rural area of MiknilSat al-Silgha, but I do not remember its name.
Tanja (Tangier) is an important area, delightful and flourishing, having prosperous towns both inland and on the coast.
Al-Zilb has as its chieftown al-Masila (Msila), and it is an area just like that which we have described. It is well-known in the region, but of course Tangier is more important.
Sijilmilsa is an important capital some distance from a river, which peters out to the south of the town. The town extends lengthwise towards the south. Surrounding it is a wall of clay, while in the center is a fortress called al-ʿAskar in which are situated the chief mosque and the palace of the AmIr. It has extremes of heat and cold, together, and the climate is quite healthy. Here is an abundance of dates, grapes, raisins, and fruits, grains, pomegranates, and a variety of other agricultural produce. It is an agreeable place for the many strangers who travel to it from every land; it is, moreover, an important frontier town. In its rural district are mines of gold and silver. The inhabitants are SunnI; they are a very fine people, having among them scholars and intellectuals. The gates of the town are as follow: Bilb al-Qbll, Bilb al-Gharbl, Bilb Ghadir al-Jazzilrln (Gate of the Butchers' Creek), Bilb Mawqif Zanilta; and there are others besides these. The town is in the middle of the sands; the people have sources of water.
Darʿa has an extensive rural district, with a number of mosques. It is situated on a rapidly flowing river; the distance around the district is about a six-day journey.
ʿArish is a country district with a number of mosques; a number of other flourishing settlements are round about it, in the middle of the sands. There are silver mines at Turart, and a gold mine between this district and the country of the Blacks; there is not in the world purer gold or a more extensive mine than this one. The roads to the area of Sijilmilsa are difficult because they cross desolate deserts of sand.
Balarm (Palermo) is the capital of Sicily; a maritime town situated on an island, it is bigger than al-Fustilt, but much more dispersed. The buildings, of stone and mortar, are red and white. Surrounding it are fountains and stands of rattan; a river named Wadi ʿAbbilS irrigates it, and in the centre are mills. Fruits,
p. 231
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
192
agricultural products, and grapes are here in abundance. The sea-water laps the surrounding walls. This city has an interior city in which stands the chief mosque, while the markets are situated on the outskirts. Another walled settlement outside is named al-Khalisa, with four gates: Bab Kutllma, Bllb al-Futūh (triumphs), Bab al-BunOd (troops), Bab al-Sinaʿa (maritime arsenal); here also is a Friday mosque, and markets.
Atrabunush (Trapani) is a walled maritime town to the west; the drinking water is derived from a river.
ʿAyn al-Mughatta and Mazar, two settlements, to the west.
Qalʿat al-Ballūt is a fortified town at a high altitude; drinking water is from a spring that wells up there.
Jirjant is a walled maritime town; drinking water is from wells.
ButhIra is a walled maritime town to the west; surrounded with a protective wall giving it the appearance of a fortress.
Saraqosa (Syracuse) consists of two adjoining settlements; endowed with a remarkable harbor; surrounded by a fosse in which the seawater flows.
Lantlnl, a walled town; situated on a river and close to the sea; the buildings are stone.
Qataniya is a maritime town to the south; walled; also called Madlnat al-Flla.
Al-Yaj (Acireale), walled, maritime, to the south; the drinking water is from a permanent stream.
BatarnO (Paterno) is to the east at the foot of “the mountain of streaming fire."
TabarmIn (Taormina) is a maritime town to the east; it overlooks the land of the Romaeans (Italy) to the east. It has a fortress of stone, and is a seaport.
The other cities to the east, ten in number, are as we have described; however Qalʿat al-Sirat is at a high altitude.
Batarliya (Petralia), to the south, in the interior; walled. In the centre is a fortress within which is a church.
BartinIq (Portinico) is not maritime. It produces much henna, similarly Akhyas; Balja is low-lying.
Siqiliyya (Sicily) is an island, extensive and important; the Muslims have no island more splendid, more prosperous, or with more cities. Its length is a distance of twelve days journey, its width four days. Between it and the country of the Romaeans is a strait in the direction of the rising sun, having a width of twelve days journey: this is al-KhalIj, numbered among the five seas.
Qurtuba (Cordoba) is the capital of al-Andalus; I have heard some ʿUthmani[?] remark that it is a more important town than Baghdad. Situated in a desert plain, a mountain overlooking it, it consists of an inner city (al-Madlna) and suburbs. The chief mosque is within the city, as are some of the markets; most of the markets, however, and the palace of the ruler are in the suburbs. In front of the town flows a large stream. The roofs are of tile: the mosque is of stone and mortar, with columns of marble; all around it are basins for the
P. 232
p. 233
193
THE REGION OF THE MAGHRIB
ablutions. Al-Madina (the inner city) has five gates: Bab al-Hadid (iron), Bab al-ʿAttilrln (perfumers), Bab al-Qantara (arcade), Bab al-Yahfld (Jews), Bab ʿAmir. The evidence is clear, and opinions agree that it is an important metropolis, friendly and attractive, where one finds justice, wisdom, political sense, benignity, obvious prosperity, and religion.
The district of al-Andalus resembles Haytal in some characteristics. There is constant raiding, continual holy strife, and the people under arms. Here, too, is much learning, a strong ruler, some specialties, commercial activity, and considerable advantages.
A certain Andalusian told me that Cordoba consists of thirteen country districts.
Fifteen miles away is Arjūna, a walled town, without orchards and trees, being, rather, an area of grains. For drinking water the inhabitants have springs, while their farms are watered only by the rain.
Qastalla, thirteen miles from Arjūna, is in a plain; abundant in trees, olives, vineyards. The drinking water is derived from wells; and the people irrigate their gardens by employing norias.
Shawdhar, eighteen miles from Cordoba; situated on a plain. Here is a great abundance of olives; drinking water is from springs.
Martush, fifteen miles from Cordoba; it is situated in the mountains, having only vineyards. There are springs.
Qanbanush, fifteen miles away; on a plain. There are farms, most of them in an area called Qanbaniya; the drinking water is from wells.
Fajj Ibn LaqIt is twenty-five miles away; on a plain, having many cultivated fields. The drinking water is derived from wells.
Balat Marwan is thirty miles away. It has a swift-flowing stream; on a plain, has some farms.
Buryana has some farms; on a plain. The inhabitants derive their drinking p. 234 water from wells. It includes a fortress built of stone, with suburbs around about. The Friday mosque is in the fortress, the marketplaces in the suburbs.
Hisn BulkOna is rich in olives, trees, and springs. It is walled, with stone. The drinking water is derived from one spring, and some wells. It is forty miles from Cordoba.
Al-Shanida is in the mountains. Vineyards, cultivated fields, figs, grapes in abundance. Drinking water is from springs and wells: two days journey from Cordoba, the overnight station being Fajj Ibn Laqlt.
Wadi ʿAbd Allah, to the south, is forty miles from Cordoba; the overnight stop is Wadi al-Rumman. On a plain, possessing farms, streams, and some trees.
Qarsis, sixty miles from Cordoba. On a plain; rich in figs, grapes, large olives; the drinking water is from springs.
Jayyan (JaOn) is fifty miles from Cordoba. The name of its rural district is Awlaba (Awliya = Ulia). The town of Jayyan is on a mountain, and has a number of springs. Its fortress was destroyed even though it is defended by the
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
194
mountains. It has twelve springs on three of which are mills which supply the provisions of al-Andalus; hence also is Cordoba provisioned. JaOn produces an abundance of fruits. You may say all you wish about its delightfulness and charm, for it is the paradise of al-Andalus, according to what I have been told. The ending -iin of the name indicates that this is a district. The buildings are of stone. It becomes cold and winds blow frequently, even so, the district is sometimes hot. According to our classification Jayyan consists of a number of districts. The chief towns are: al-Jafr, in the mountains, about ten miles from Jayyan. This area, which has many streams and mills, abounds in trees, fruits, olives, grapes, and is situated in a wadi in which is a concentration of a variety of fruits.
Bayghū (Priego), in the mountains. Here are valleys from which springs bubble forth and turn mills; an abundance of mulberry, olives, and figs.
Martush, a walled town on a mountain. The inhabitants derive their drinking water from springs; figs, olives, and vines in abundance.
Qant, walled, situated on a plain; no orchards. The climate is healthy.
Gharnata (Granada) is on a stream. Here is a munya thirteen miles long, belonging to the ruler, in it all kinds of excellent and remarkable fruit. The town is on a plain, and has many cultivated fields. I asked someone, “What is the munya?” Said he: “It is the pleasure ground of the ruler."
Mantisha (Mentesa), a walled town on a stream; an abundance of olives and figs; on a plain.
Bayyasa (Baeza), a walled town on a mountain; buildings of clay; drinking water from springs; many fig trees and vineyards.
I asked someone, “Has Cordoba any other rural districts and towns besides these?" He said, “No." Said I, “But Ishbiliya (Seville) and Bajjana (Pechina)?" and I mentioned a number of other towns. Said he, “These are districts that pertain to regions, just as you refcr to al-Qayrawan, and Tahart, and Sijilmasa." In al-Andalus they call a country district (rustiiq) a region (iqlim). But I consider these as districts (kūra) according to our classification, even though they are not more important than the districts ofHaytal, and nor are they inferior to them. In fact, we may say that all our information has established that it is the same in the Maghrib (West) as in the Mashriq (Orientfaach one of these two consists of two separated sections; just as al-Mashriq comprises Khurasan and Haytal, the Jayhūn separating the two, similarly al-Maghrib and al-Andalus are separated by the Romaean Sea (Mediterranean).
However, we have been unable to survey al-Andalus, so we left it all of a piece; we did, however, describe the district of Cordoba, because of the many informants who spoke to me about it, and gave me a very clear account of its character. I submitted my book to one of the shaykhs ofal-Andalus, and said he: “On this basis al-Andalus should comprise eighteen districts," and he enumerated: Bajjana (Pechina), Malaqa (Malaga), Balansiya (Valencia), TudmIr, Saraqūsa (Saragossa), Yabisa (Ibiza), Wadi THijara (Guadalajara), Tutlla (Tudela),
p. 235
195
THE REGION OF THE MAGHRIB
Washqa (Huesca), Madlnat Salim (Medinaceli), Tulaytula (Toledo), Ishblliya (Seville), Batalyawth (Badajoz), Baja (Beja), Qurtuba (Cordoba), ShadhOna p. 236 (Sidonia), al-Jazlrat al-Khadhraʾ (Algeciras). I asked another and he said that this information is correct; however, he added to the list: Liblra, and Ukhshunuba. It is possible that some of these names are names of districts, just on the analogy of Ilaq, Kush, and al-Saghaniyan. But God best knows the truth in this.
A Summary Account of Conditions in this Region The Maghrib is an important region, great in area, and long, in which one may obtain most of the products found in the other regions, and at a low price. It is rich in palm trees and olives. Here are areas of heat, likewise zones of cold. Jews there are numerous. The climate is excellent, as is the water. As for the heat, one encounters it from Egypt as far as SOs al-Aqsil, except in the mountain areas and the cold localities. The cold is predominant in al-Andalus. In this province are many lepers, eunuchs, stupid people, misers, few storytellers. The people are agreeable, liking knowledge and the learned; they are very busy with commerce, and with going from place to place.
As for the religious schools, there are three categories here: in al-Andalus the school of Malik, and the reading system of Nafiʿ prevail. The Muslims here declare: “We know nothing but the Book of God and the Muwatta [The Beaten Path—a book oflegal maxims taken from the Traditions, and the basis ofMalik's system of jurisprudence] of Malik. Should they detect a Hanafite or a ShafiGte they expel him; but if they light upon a Muʿtazilite or a Shlca or anyone heterodox such as these, they may kill him.
In the remaining part of the Maghrib, as far as Egypt, the Muslims do not recognize the teaching of al-ShāfiʿJ--o whom may God have mercy-acknowledging only AbO Hanlfa and Malikten whom may God have mercy. One day, as I was discussing a question with someone there, I quoted a saying of al-Shafiʿbon whom may God have mercy. Said he to me, “Hold your tongue! Who is al-ShafiʿJ? There are but two ‘seas'-AbO Hanlfa for the people of the Orient, and Malik for the people of the West. Shall we abandon both of these, and occupy ourselves with a (trickling stream'?" I saw that the adherents of Malik--o whom may God have mercy-hated al-ShafiʿI, for, said they, “He received his instruction from Malik, then went in opposition to him." As for myself, I have never seen two groups in better agreement and with less fanaticism than these [Hanafites and Malikites]; and I heard them speaking, on p. 237 the authority of their elders, about that same matter, including a remarkable account to the effect that one year the man who sat as judge would be Hanafite, the next year Malikite.
I asked, “How did it come to pass that the doctrine of Abo Hanlfa arrived among you, seeing that he was not on the path frequented by you?" Said they,
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
196
“When Wahb bin Wahb came here, having studied with Malikte whom may God have mercy-and with the knowledge of the law and of the religious sciences that he had, Asad bin ʿAbd Allah disdained to be his pupil because of his own self-importance and egotism. So he, Asad, himself, left for Madlna with the intention of studying under the direction of Malik, but he found him ailing. Asad having stayed with him a long time, Malik said to him: ‘Return to Ibn Wahb, for I entrusted my knowledge to him, to spare you the journey.' This was rather hard on Asad so he asked whether any equal to Malik was acknowledged. He was told that there was a young man at KOfa named Muhammad bin al-Hasan, a disciple of AbO Hanlfa. Asad went to Muhammad, who devoted his attention to him more than to anyone else. Observing his understanding and eagerness, he instilled in him an exact knowledge of the law. When, then, he knew that he was able to stand on his own, and had acquired the knowledge he had wanted to, he allowed him to return to the Maghrib. When he arrived there the young people frequented him, and were enlightened on various aspects of the law that had confused them, subtleties that pleased them, and questions that had never even sounded on the ears of Ibn Wahb. Some of the people formed a study circle around him, and thus the teaching of AbO Hanlfa-- whom may God have mercy-spread in the Maghrib." Said I, “Why has it not spread in al-Andalus?" Said they, “It was no less current in al-Andalus than it is here. However, one day, representatives of the two schools exchanged their respective views in the presence of the ruler, who asked of them, ‘Whence was AbO Hanlfa?' Said they, ‘From al-Kufa.' ‘And Malik?' Said they: ‘From al-Madlna.' Said he, ‘The learned one from the town ofthe Hijra is sufficient for us,' and he expelled the adherents of AbO Hanlfa, saying, ‘I do not wish that in my province there be two schools of law.'" I received this account from a number of the shaykhs of al-Andalus.
Addition/version MS. c.
I enquired about this account of a number of Andalusians, and they said that it is correct. For my part, I believe that the ruler was biased, because the Banu Umayya detest (All, and the viewpoint of Abu Hanlfa on (All. Moreover, they do not like the people of al-Kofa, because they are Shlʿa.
The third group represents the doctrines of the Fatimids, and this consists of three subdivisions: the first, the points on which the Imams have disagreed, p. 238 such as the qunūt in the morning prayer, the saying out loud of the bismilah, saying the witr with one rakaC [bending of the torso in prayer, followed by two prostrations], and such matters. The second: a return to the practices of the early Muslims, such as saying the iqama [the recitation of a part of the call to prayer] twice, which the Umayyads had restored to the saying it once; the wearing of white garments, the ʿAbbasids having instated black. The third division: those practices which are proper to themselves and about which the Imams do not disagree, even though they may not be known to be old practices, such as the
197
THE REGION OF THE MAGHRIB
“hayya Calii" during the call to prayer, making the first of the month the day on which the new moon is seen, saying the prayer of the eclipse of the moon with five rakaCs, making two prostrations at each bowing. These are practices of the Shlʿa.
The Fatimids have literary works which they study, and I looked into their Kitab al-Daʿā?im \٠Ki،āb Daʿa١imal-Islam—The Be^ok ofthe Pillars of Islam of al-Qadhl al-Nuʿman ibn Abi ʿAbd Allah]. It seems they agree with the Muʿtazilites in most of the principles of the law, and they profess the doctrines of the Ismaʿllites. They have a secret they do not teach nor communicate to anyone whatever, unless it is to one whom they trust, having taken an oath from him, and a solemn pledge. They have been called Batiniyya, because they disregard the literal meaning of the Quriin in favor of hidden meanings and strange interpretations, and finical explanations. These usūl (principles) constitute the doctrines of the Idrlsids, who predominate in the district of al-Sūs al-Aqsa, and they are close to the principles of the Qaramites.
The people of the Maghrib and of the Mashriq view the doctrines of the Fatimids in three different ways: some acknowledge them and believe firmly in them; some have rejected them and refused to believe in them; the others look on them as merely divergences among the Muslim community.
Most of the inhabitants of Sicily are Hanafites.
I read in a book which some shaykh ofthe Karramites compiled in Naysabūr, that in the Maghrib his sect has seven hundred monasteries. But I can assert that it is not so, and that they do not have even one!
The system of reading the {hlriin followed in the entire region is the reading of Nafiʿ, solely.
Customs of the Region. In these six regions of the Arabs evidence is not taken except from an impartial witness. On one occasion when I was present at the signing of a marriage contract, Abu al-Tayyib Hamdan bade me sign my attestation, and I was congratulated for this. The inhabitants of the Maghrib carry the dead only by the head or the legs. They sit down after each prayer at p. 239 night during Ramadhan. They do not skin the sheep in preparation for roasting. Very seldom do they enter the public baths without wraps.
It is the custom to follow the Egyptian fashion in the Maghrib, but it is seldom people wear the taylasiin. They frequently fold the mantle in two and throw it over the back like a cloak. They wear dyed hoods; the Berbers wear a black burnoose. The country people wear tailored garments, the common people wear kerchiefs.
The merchants ride Egyptian asses and mules. All their copies of the Quriin, and their registers are written on parchment. The people of al-Andalus are the most skilled in copying; their script is rounded.
Some trade is carried on here. Wool cloth and garments are exported from Barqa; from Sicily the most excellent short garments. From Ifrlqiya, olive oil,
198	THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
pistachios, saffron, almonds, plums, satchels, leather mats, waterskins; from Fits, dates and all the other things we have mentioned. From al-Andalus, much cloth, and some remarkable products that are special to them.
Specialties. Among the specialties of this region is the coral extracted from the sea at a peninsula, the name of its town, Marsa al-Kharaz (La Calle); one goes to it by means of a narrow passageway as at al-Mahdiyya. From the sea, here, the pod grows up, and this constitutes the coral, which forms like mountains in the sea: there is no other source of it but here. People go out in skiffs to collect it, providing themselves with wooden crosses, around which they loosely tie some flax. To each cross they attach two ropes, of which two men take hold and throw the cross into the sea. The oarsmen cause the boat to rotate so that the cross clings to the coral, which they then pull in. One may extract from ten thousand to ten dirhams weight of coral. The coral is then polished in a special marketplace, and sold in bulk, at a low price; it has neither lustre nor colour before it is polished.
In Tutila (Tudela), an abundance of sables. In al-Andalus, a leather used in the making of sword-handles. At a certain time of the year a goodly amount of ambergris is cast up from the Atlantic Ocean. A considerable amount of white ammonia is produced in Sicily. I heard that its production had been cut off, and that the Egyptians managed to do without it by using the soot from their public baths.
Weights and Measures. The ratl of Baghdad was used in the entire region, except for that used in the weighing of pepper, this being lighter than that of Baghdad by ten dirhams weight; that of Baghdad is now used, however, in all the provinces under the Fatimids in the entire Maghrib.
As for measures of capacity: the qafz of al-Qayrawan is thirty-two thumns (eighths) and the thumn is six mudd-s of the mudd of the Prophet-God's peace and blessings be upon him. The qafz of al-Andalus is sixty ratls. The rube (quarter) is eighteen ratls; thefanīqa is half a qafiz. The standard dry measure of the Fatimids is the dawwiir, and this is lighter than the wayba of Egypt by a very little. The top of this measure is fitted tightly with an iron crossbeam, a vertical member of iron is erected from the bottom of the measure to meet the crossbeam above, which is rotated on the top of the measure (wayba), so that when the measure is filled the contents are smoothed evenly with the mouth of the wayba, and the measure is thus correct. Their ratl weights are made oflead, and stamped on each ratl is the name of the Commander of the Faithful. These weights are collected in one place from time to time, and ordered to be remoulded, each weight being stamped anew, if there are about ten of them to be processed.
p. 240
The coinage: in all the provinces of this region, as far as the boundaries of the province ofDamascus, the standard is the dinar, which is lighter than the mithqal
199
THE REGION OF THE MAGHRIB
by a habba, that is to say a grain of barley. The coin bears an inscription in the round.
There is also the small rubc, (quarter of a dinar); these two coins pass current by number, [rather than by weight]. The dirham also is short in legal weight. A half-dirham is called a qīrāt; there is also the quarter, the eighth part, and the sixteenth part which is called a kharmba. All ofthese circulate by number [rather than by weight], but their use thus does not bring any reduction in price. The sanja (counterpoise weights) used are made of glass, and are stamped just as we described about the ratls.
The ratl of the city of Tunis is twelve uqtya (ounce), this latter being twelve dirhams (weight).
The remarkable things in this region are many. Among them is the AbO Qalamūn, a creature which scratches itself on the rocks on the seashore. It leaves some of its fur there, which has the softness of silk and the colour of gold. The people do not leave a thread of it behind, because it is very rare. p. 241 It is gathered, and cloths woven from it; and in the course of a day it assumes various colours. The ruler has forbidden the export of it, though, of course, some is exported secretly. One garment made of it may fetch ten thousand dinars.
In Sicily is a mountain from which fire bubbles for four months, once every ten years; the rest of the time it emits smoke. Around the mountain the snow is compressed, except where the smoke comes out.
In the town of Ikijil are springs that flow at times of Prayer, and then cease to flow. Should a man go there who has killed someone unlawfully, the springs will not flow at all.
Now, should someone say to us that we have omitted mention of many remarkable things of this region, we should reply that we have omitted only what predecessors of ours have mentioned in their works. One of the excellences of our book is avoiding what others have mentioned; and the most objectionable feature of their books is that their methods are in every way opposite to ours. Do you not realize that if you read the book of al-Jayhilnl, you will see that it contains all of the original work of Ibn Khurradildhbih, and that it is on this he built his work. Read the book of Ibn al-Faqlh, and it is exactly as if you were reading the book of al-Jilhiz and al-Zij aUzam (The Great Ephemeris). But read our book, and you find that it speaks for itself only, and, of its kind, somewhat like an orphan, is unique in its organization. In fact if I had felt myself at liberty not to have to put together this book of mine, I should not have troubled myself with it; but since God-may He be exalted-enabled me to travel to the remotest parts of the realm of Islilm, showed me its conditions, and inspired me to classify it, it was obligatory that we complete the work for the benefit of all Muslims. Consider the saying of God-may He be exalted-: “Say: ‘Journey in the land”' (Quran, sūra 6, v. 11) and “Have they not traveled through the land
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
200
so that they may behold ...” (Qurlin, sūra 12, v. 109). In any case, in what we have set down is a lesson for the wise, and profits for the traveler.
As for the Country of the Blacks (Ardh al-Sūdūn), it borders on this region [the Maghrib] and Egypt, from the south: it is a desolate, extensive, difficult country. The population is constituted of many races. In their mountains one finds those fruits that occur generally in the mountains of the realm of Islam, but most of the people there do not eat them. They have, however, other fruits, victuals, foodstuffs, and herbs not found with us. In trade among them, gold and silver are not used; however, the Qarmatiyyūn (Garamantes) use salt as means of exchange, and the Nubians and Abyssinians thus use cloth. The Nubians live beyond Egypt, the Baja beyond ʿAydhab, and the Abyssinians beyond Zaylaʿ.
The black eunuchs whom you encounter are of three classes: the class that is taken to Egypt, and these are the best kind; the class that is taken to ʿAdan-the Berber—and they are the worst kind. The third kind resemble the Abyssinians. Of white eunuchs there are two classes: the Saqaliba [Slavs], whose land is beyond Khwarazm; they are, however, taken to al-Andalus where they are castrated, then exported to Egypt. Then there are the Romaeans, who are exported to Syria and Aqūr; however, this source has been cut off because of the ravaging of our frontiers.
I asked a group of them about the process of castration, and I learned that the Romaeans castrate their youngsters intended for dedication to the church, and they confine them so that they do not preoccupy themselves with women, or suffer carnal desires. When the Muslims raid, they attack the churches and take the youngsters away from them.
Addition/version MS؛. c.
In the case of the Romaeans, they would remove the testicles, but leave the penis, and this they would do to their youngsters when they dedicated them to the church; when the Muslims would raid they would capture them from the church.
The Slavs are taken to a town beyond Pechina, where the people are Jews, and they castrate them. There was disagreement among my informants about how the castration was done. According to some of them, the penis and the scrotum are cut off at the same time. Others asserted that the scrotum is cut and the testicles removed, after which a stick is inserted under the penis which is then cut off at the base. I inquired of the eunuch CUrayb, a learned and truthful man, “Muʿallim (eunuch), tell me about eunuchs, seeing that the scholars are not in agreement about them. Abū Hanlfa asserts that they are able to have legitimate children, and are recognized as the fathers of the children their wives bear them: this is a matter that can be properly settled only by you." Said he, “Abu Hanlfa was correct-may God have mercy on him-and I will tell you how this is. You should know that when the youngsters are about to be castrated, the scrotum is cut open for the removal of the testicles. It may be that the youngster
p.242
201
THE REGION OF THE MAGHRIB
is frightened, so that one of his testicles ascends into his abdomen. If it is searched for and not found at the time, it will descend after the cut has healed. p. 243 If it is the left testicle that remains, the eunuch can experience lust and have sperm; if it is the right one, he may grow a beard, as in the case of so-and-so, and so-and-so. Abo Hanlfa-may God have mercy on him-adhered to the saying of the Prophet-may God's peace and blessings be upon him— ‘The child pertains to the conjugal bed,' for it might be that the eunuch would be one of those to whom a testicle remained."
I related this to AbO Saʿld al-Jūrl in NaysabOr, and he said, “This is perfectly possible, for one of my testicles is small," and in fact, his beard was light and thin.
When the castration is done, a little pencil of lead is placed in the urinary opening; this is removed during urination, and [is replaced] until the wound heals, so that the hole will not close up.
Language. The language of the inhabitants of the Maghrib is Arabic, but it is hardly understandable, since it varies, as we have mentioned, from region to region. They have another language which is close to Romaean.
The further west one goes, the people are whiter, more blue-eyed, and have thicker beards ... [lacuna in MS.] ... their chief centre is the town of Satlf. It is the people here who prepared the way for ʿUbayd Allah [the Fatimid Mahdi]. Most of the open country of this region is inhabited by Berbers, who are, however, most numerous in al-Sūs. They are a people like the people of Khwiirazm: their language is incomprehensible, and their dispositions disagreeable, for they are mean and violent. I heard that one of them tightened his moneybelt around his middle, and went on the Pilgrimage, returning without having touched his money: then he married! The Berbers are the people who visit Jerusalem the least.
Their defects. In Ifriqiya are two towns in which is sold the flesh of dogs hanging from butcher hooks; these are Qstlliya and Nafta, where the inhabitants are accused of putting dog meat in the harisa. Along with that they are crude, vile-natured and coarse. One of them may be seen cooking some of it in the pot, then selling the meat or the thurda (broth).
The routes into the furthermost regions are difficult, running through sands and deserts.
The Governments. In al-Andalus, no ruler whatever is mentioned in the khutba [Friday sermon in the chief mosque] except the Umayyads. As for al-Sūs al-Aqsa, the first person who took it over was Idrls bin ʿAbd Allah bin Hasan bin Hasan bin ʿAli ibn Abi Talib, and this is how it happened. Idrls escaped p. 244 from the battle between the ʿAbbasids and the Talibites, at Fakhkh, during the khalifate of al-Hadl, and he proceeded to Egypt. Over the Post routes in Egypt
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
202
at the time was Wadih, deputy of al-MansOr, and, moreover, a Shiʿa. So Wadih conducted Idrls on the Post route to al-Maghrib, and when he reached Tangiers the people there and round about deferred to him. When al-Rashld succeeded to the khalifate and was informed of this, he beheaded Wadih and crucified him. He also secretly sent al-Shammakh al-Yamaml, a deputy of al-Mahdi, as an agent against Idrls, writing for him a letter of recommendation to Ibrahim bin al-Aghlab, his deputy over Ifrlqiya. Al-Shammakh continued on his way until he reached Zuwayla, where he announced that he was a physician, and one of the supporters of their cause [Idrisid]. They trusted him and received him well. On one occasion Idrls complained of a toothache, and in the evening al-Shammakh gave him a tooth remedy that was, however, poisoned, bidding him to treat his tooth with it the following morning; he then fled. When Idrls treated his tooth with the poison, it killed him. Al-Shammakh was sought, but it was not possible to overtake him, and al-Rashld appointed him director of the postal service in Egypt.
Addition/version MS. c.
These are they who are over the kingdom at the present time. The first of them was ʿUbayd Allah. His missionaries and teachers, and those who supported him were the Banfl Kutama, and they made the conquests for him. The origin ofthe house is in Salamiyya, a city in the district of Hims. They are Bedouin, and a division of the Banfl Bahila. ʿUbayd Allah was called al-Mahdl. After him came al-Hadl, then al-Muʿ؛zz, and it is he who conquered Egypt; then al-ʿAzlz. When they were heading for Egypt with their armies, Abo Jaʿfar al-Tahawl, the jurisprudent ofEgypt, rose up against them, and said he: “0 you people! Go out against this tribe, for they are rebels, and holy strife against them is obligatory on you; for they are altering the Sunna of the Prophet, they are rending the religion asunder, and they are misleading the community.” So the populace marched out against them as one solid troop; but the others routed them and threw them back, and gained a considerable amount of booty.
As for the distances:
from Barqa to al-Nadama, one stage; thence to Takanast, one stage; thence to al-Maghar, one stage; thence to Hallman, one stage; thence to Makhil, one stage; thence to Jubb al-Maydaʿan, one stage; thence to Jiyad al-Saghlr, one stage; p. 245 thence to Hayy ʿAbd Allah, one stage; thence to Marj al-Shaykh, one stage; thence to al-ʿAqaba, one stage; thence to Khara'ib Abl Hallma, one stage; thence to Khirbat al-Qawm, one stage; thence to Qasr al-Shammas one stage;
203
THE REGION OF THE MAGHRIB
thence to Sikkat al-Hammam, one stage;
thence to Jubb al-ʿAwsaj, one stage;
thence to Kanilʾis al-Harlr (al-Hadld), one stage;
thence to al-Tāhūna, one stage;
thence to Haniyyat al-Rūm, one stage;
thence to Dhilt al-Humilm, one stage;
thence to Bomlnah, one stage;
thence to Alexandria, one stage.
From Tripoli to al-Masdūda, one stage; thence to Aristil, one stage; thence to al-Rilshidiyya, one stage; thence to Qusūr Hassiln, one stage; thence to Maghmadilsh, one stage; thence to Surt (Sirte), one stage; thence to Qasr al-ʿIbādl, one stage; then؟e to al-Yahūdiyyatilyn, one stage; thence to Qasr al-ʿAtish, one stage; thence to Sabkha ManhOsil, one stage; thence to Baladrūb (Balbad), one stage; thence to Barmast, one stage; thence to Sulūq, one stage; thence to Awbariln, one stage; thence to Qasr al-Fil (Qasr alʿAsal), one stage; thence to Malltiya, one stage; thence to Barqa, one stage. p. 246 From Tripoli to Biʾr al-Jammillln, one stage; thence to Qasr al-Daraq, one stage; thence to Bitrjamt, one stage; thence to al-Fawwilra, one stage; thence to Qabis (Gabes), one stage; thence to (Biʾr) al-ZaytOna, one stage; thence to Katilna, one stage; thence to al-Kabs, one stage; thence to al-Qayrawiln, one stage.
From there one crosses the desert areas as far as al-Sūs al-Adnil, a distance oftwo thousand one hundred fifty miles; to arrive at al-Sūs al-Aqsil requires a journey of twenty-three days. The width ofthe Romaean Sea at this point is eighteen miles.
One may go from al-Qayrawiln a distance of seven stages to Qafsa (Jafsa), thence to Qastlliya, three stages; thence to Tiihart, a journey of fifteen days, passing through areas of sand, and some villages. One then travels among the
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
204
Berbers for three days on the way to Fas; then one travels through inhabited areas for eight stages, as far as al-ShaqOr; thence, a similar distance passing villages and some streams, as far as al-Basra. At this point, one has come to the limit of al-Sūs al-Adna.
Should one wish to do so, one may travel from al-Qayrawan to Satlf, a distance of ten stages; thence to Tahart, twenty; thence to Fas, fifty; thence to al-Sūs al-Aqsa, thirty.
From al-Qayrawan to Zawila is a journey of one month. From al-Qayrawan to Sijilmasa, over the desert, is thirty stages; through the settled areas, fifty. From al-Qayrawan to Tunis, three stages; thence to Tabarqa, ten stages; thence to Tanas, six stages;
thence to Jazlrat Bani Zagannaya (Alger), five stages.
From al-Qayrawan to Gabes, to Nafta, to Qarna, to Sablba, to Madinat al-Qusūr, or to al-Mahdiyya, in every instance is two stages.
From al-Qayrawan to Lafis, to al-JazIra, to Ubba, to Marsa al-Kharaz, in every instance is three stages.
From al-Qayrawan to Qabis (Gabes) to Qasr allfrlqli to Majjana, in every instance, five stages.
From Majjana to Tabassa, to Bāghāy, to Dūfana, to ʿAyn al-ʿAsafir, to Dar Maluwwal, to Tubna, to Maqqara, or to al-Masila, in every instance, one stage; and between every one of them and the next, in the order in which we have enumerated them, one stage.
From al-Masila westward to Ashir is a journey of three days; thence to Tahart, five days; thence to Fakkan, five days; thence to Tilimsan (Tlemcen), two stages; thence to Jurawa, two stages.
From Tilimsan to Saʿ, two stages; [lacuna] ... similarly.
Masila marks the extremity of Ifriqiya.
From Tahart to Nakūr, thirty stages; thence to Sijilmasa, fifteen stages; from Fas to al-Basra, six stages; from Fas to Azlla, eight stages.
p. 247
205
THE REGION OF THE MAGHRIB
We have cut short and summarized somewhat enumeration of the distances between places in this part of the Maghrib, because they are long and many, and but few travelers pass through there.
From al-Qayrawiln to Sosa (Sousse), to Qalshilna, or to Tumiljir, in every instance, one stage.
As for distances in al-Andalus I have verified that from Cordoba, which is the capital, to Ishbiliya (Seville) is a distance of three stages; thence southwards to Istija, one stage; from Cordoba to Tulaytula (Toledo), a journey of six days; and to Wildl ’l-Hijilra (Guadalajara), two stages.
From Cordoba to Miknilsa (Mekhes) is a journey of four days; thence to al-Huwwilra, the same. Thence to Nafza, ten days; thence to SammOra (Zamora) four days.
From Cordoba to Quriya (Coria), twelve stages; thence to Milrida, four days.
From Coria to Bilja, six days; and from Bilja to the last town of the district of Shantarln (Santarem), seventeen days.
From Bilja to Fahs al-Ballot, two days; thence to Labia, fourteen days.
From Bilja to QarmOna, four days, and this town, situated to the west, between Bilja and Seville, is on the route of Milrida (Merida).
From QarmOna to Seville, two stages; from Istija to MawrOr (Moron de la Frontera), one stage; thence to ShadhOna, two days, or to Jabal Tilriq (Gibraltar), three days.
From Istija to Millaqa (Malaga), seven days on the eastern route; or to ArjidOna, three stages.
From Istija to Bajjilna, six stages, or to Mursiya (Murcia), seven days; or to Valencia, twenty days,
thence to TurtOsha, twelve stages.
From Murcia to Bajjilna, six days; thence to Malaga, ten days; thence to Gibraltar, four days;
p. 248
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
206
thence to Shadhona, three days; thence to Seville, four days.
As for this town of Seville, the people of the Maghrib have proverbs about it, because of its remoteness, just as the people of the Orient have about Farghllnll. I do not know the first Isblliya (Seville).
An Account ofthe Desert ofthe Bedouin
You should know that among the regions of the Arabs, excluding the Maghrib, there is a desert that has waters, streams, wells, springs, hills, sand dunes, villages and palm trees; there are few mountains, many Bedouin, frightening roads, and highways hard to find. The climate is excellent, the water bad. There is no lake therein, nor a river except al-Azraq; and no town except Taymaʾ. Some people consider it a part of the Peninsula of the Arabs, but of course it is not. Some people divide it up among the different regions, some consider it a part of Syria. We, however, have decided to treat of it separately, and give a clear description of it, because no one from any of the [other] thirteen regions going to Makka by land can get there except through this desert, so a knowledge of it is indispensable. Moreover, there are open roads there that are not generally known, and sources of water of which people are ignorant. Thus, in describing it there are advantages without number, and there is a benefit and a value that cannot be gainsaid.
As for myself, I have traveled in this desert numerous times, have surveyed its south, north, east, and west. I have searched for information on the routes, have asked about its water supplies, and have researched deeply so as to have a knowledge of it; thus I have arrived at information of its general conditions, and have become acquainted with most of its roads.
Here is a map of it, and in God is success. [Map X]
We deem this desert to extend from Wayla to ʿAbbadan, then to Balis in a curve, then to al-Raqqa, thence back to Wayla. We have distributed over it twelve routes, nine running the length of the desert, reaching to Makka, three going its width, reaching to Syria. There is also another road to Qurh, reaching Makka from al-Basra, then going on to Egypt. The first is the Route of Egypt; then the Route of al-Ramla; then the Route of al-Sharat; then the Route of Tabuk; then the route ofWubayr; then the Route ofBatn al-Sirr; then the Route of al-Rahba; then the Route of Hit; then the Route of al-Kūfa; then the Route of al-Qadisiyya; then the Route of Wasit; then the Route of Wadi ’1-Qurā; then the Route of al-Basra: these then are the highways, in order, and we describe them individually.
As for the Route of Egypt, one goes from al-Buwayb to Bunduqa (Manzil Ibn Sadaqa), one stage;
thence to ʿAjrūd, one stage; thence to al-Madina, one stage; thence to al-KursI, one stage; thence to al-Hafar, one stage; thence to al-Manzil, one stage; thence to Wayla, one stage.
p. 249
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
208
Map X: The Arabian Desert (see p. 414).
From MS. Sprenger 5—Ahlwardt 6034 by kind permission of the Staatsbibliothek Preussischer Kulturbesitz, Berlin, Orientabteilung.
209
AN ACCOUNT OF THE DESERT OF THE BEDOUIN
As for the Route of al-Ramla, one goes from al-Sukkariyya to al-Tulayl, two stages;
then from al-Tulayl to al-Ghamr, two stages; thence to Wayla, two stages. p. 250 As for the Route of al-Sharat:
from Sughar to Wayla, four stages; and regarding these two [latter] routes, when they are in al-Sham, the passageway is through a desolate semidesert, so they go close to the edge of the desert we have mentioned.
As for the Route of Tabūk:
from ʿAmman to Mucan, a distance of two watering places [two days journey]; thence to Tabuk, a similar distance; thence to Taymaʾ, four days; thence to Wadi '1-Qura, four days.
As for the Route of Wubayr:
from ʿAmmlln to Wubayr, three days journey; thence to al-Ajwall, four stages; thence to Thajir, two days; thence to Taymaʾ, three days.
As for the Route of Batn al-Sirr:
from ʿAmman to ʿAwnld, two days; thence to al-Muhdatha, half a day; thence to al-Nabk, the same; thence to a source of water, one day; thence to al-Jarba; one day; thence to ʿArfaja, one day and a half; thence to Mukhrl, three days; thence to Taymaʾ, four days.
These are the three routes leading to the destinations of Pilgrimage: there is the route of the Bedouin to Makka, and it was the post route for the Umayyad rulers when they were in Damascus; over it passed the troops of the two ʿUmars [Abū Bakr and ʿUmar bin al-Khattab], the time of the conquest of Syria. These routes are close to each other, and safe, and are under the dominance ofthe Banū Kilab, who conduct most of the Syrians assembling in ʿAmman for the journey of the Pilgrimage. I have traveled over this road a number of times. p. 251 As for the route of al-Qadisiyya:
from al-Qadisiyya to al-Mughltha, seventeen miles; thence to al-Qārcaʾ, twenty-two miles;
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
210
thence to Waqisa, twenty-four miles; thence to al-ʿAqaba, twenty-nine miles; thence to al-Qaʿʿ twenty-four miles; thence to Zubala, twenty-four miles; thence to al-Shuqūq, twenty-one miles; thence to al-Bitan, twenty-nine miles; thence to al-Tha٩abiyya, twenty-nine miles; thence to al-Khuzaymiyya, thirty-two miles; thence to Ajfur, twenty-four miles; thence to Fayd, thirty-six miles.
As for the route of Wasit:
I did not travel along it; however, it meets the main road at al-Tha٩abiyya.
As for the route of al-Basra: from al-Basra to al-Hufayr, eighteen miles; thence to al-Ruhayl, twenty-eight miles; thence to al-Shaji, twenty-seven miles; thence to Hafar Abl Mnsa, twenty-six miles; thence to Mawiyya, thirty-two miles; thence to Dhat al-CUshar, twenty-nine miles; thence to al-Yansūʿa, twenty-three miles; thence to al-Sumayna, twenty-nine miles; thence to al-Qaryatayn, twenty-two miles; thence to al-Nibaj, twenty-three miles.
These are the routes of al-ʿIrāq going to Makka; also the nine routes leading to destinations of Pilgrimage going lengthwise in the desert.
As for the route of al-Kofa: from al-Kofa to al-Ruhayma, twelve miles; thence to al-Nahit, two days; thence to al-Quray, the same; thence to al-Khanfas, one day; thence to al-Hashya, the same; thence to al-Ghurayfa, the same; thence to Qurakir, the same; thence to al-Azraq, the same; thence to ʿAmman, the same; all of these, eleven short stages.
As for the route of Hit: from Hit to Damascus, ten days, and the same from p. 2S2 al-Rahba. As for the route of Wadi ’1-Qura, from al-Basra to Syria is a journey of approximately one month, and I did not travel over it.
211
AN ACCOUNT OF THE DESERT OF THE BEDOUIN
As for the route of al-Rahba: from al-Rahba to...[lacuna in MS.]
These are the three routes of Pilgrimage across the width of the desert, and there are smaller tracks that go out to Adhrfat and elsewhere.
As for the route of Wadi '1-Qura, it is said to emerge at al-Munhab (al-Muntahab), beyond Fayd; and from al-Munhab to Wadi '1-Qura is a journey of five nights; to Taymaʾ, four nights; to Tabuk, seven nights; to Wadi Tayyiʾ, two nights.
From al-Basra to al-Kufa on the fringe of this desert is ten difficult stages. Most of the stopping places we have mentioned are at a well or a creek.
This then is a description of this desert and its waters. You should know that it is an extensive desert with many Bedouin. In it grows a plant called the fathth, something like mustard. It grows wild, the people gather it and take it to the brook, soak it in water, causing it to open up so that the seed comes out: this they grind, bake, and eat. A common practice here is eating the flesh of the jerboa, and snakes. The people here are highwaymen, yet they give shelter to the stranger, and guide those who have gone astray; they also convoy caravans, and indeed, it is not possible for a person to travel this way without either a guard or some force. Sometimes you see them attack the Pilgrimage caravan, despite its strength, and they take the camels and the money.
On the boundary of this desert, you go from Wayla toward Madaʾin Qawm Lot and you ascend to Maʾab, then toward the border of (Amman and Adhriʿat, and the rural areas of Damascus, Tadmur, Silmiyya, and the area ofHims, on to Balis. Then you return to the Euphrates, turning towards al-Raqqa, and al-Rahba, and al-Dalia, on to Hit and al-Anbar; then toward al-Hira and al-Qadisiyya, and the western end of al-Bataʾih (The Swamps), then toward the district of al-Basra on to ʿAbbadan. There are some who add al-Sharat to this desert; in any case, I have included its towns in it, and that seems quite correct.
In this desert there is no city except Taymaʾ; it is an ancient, extensive site, abounding in date palms, splendid gardens, abundant water, with remarkably god climate, and having an excellent spring which flows through an iron pipe to a pool, from which the water is distributed among the gardens. They have sweet water wells, also. The city is on a plain. However, much ofit has been laid waste. The mosque is in the city, and the buildings are, generally, around the market. All the dates there are excellent. However, the people are greedy; there is no savant there anyone would consult, no judge there anyone would depend on. In fact their preacher there I saw was a vegetable vendor, their judge a shoemaker. Virulent fanaticism is rife in Taymaʾ, and the Dawūdiyya put on armour during times ofriot.
The stopping places between Egypt and Wayla are irrigated by sūqias (sakiehs, water scoops).
p. 253
JO auuos ujsodap ااأ3؛ل AOjd؛s؛suo ٧بمولوd33٩3jBS JOJ؛JOJ ‘3u اأ3ل3 XquJOMUsnJU 3JE XJ3A3 ٩؛aonpoad JO pu ؛ou s punoj 3٩ اأ3ل3ء uo ajdoad 31(1 puv ااأ3 ل٠؛اقللاق3 jood B puv (3J31JU" داأ3 JO 3JE S3٧b3 ؛UOJ؛ pnqpVj ou suuauunuouu OSJB 3J31J ءا-هءسلء pXvj ؛SSSSSJJJOJ OMU SuiABtj ‘jjassp 31(1 apjsuno UMOU IJBUUS B s؛ 3JE sq٧B٩ ٧٧ ou sjood 3JE B^^JUU^BZnq^-IB ل1٧0ج3ل AJ3S؛"pssn jaSuO{ ou S[[3M (3I٩B33 S3UOJS" دا31ة3 UJ .purs JO SE3JE 3JE ؛nb B s؛٧3 33Bjd"
t)؛٩J}-JE J٩t؟JO 33UBJJU3 aqu UB :ip q٧؛B SptUBJS 33Bjd J3٧BM s لءلج3 JO ptunouu J3٧EM
jjj؛٧b3؛uo ؛I ajdoad auuog ■vtbvs Aq s؛3A ؛SS3JJOJ aqu u داأ3 jood uaqiEJ scq i(3M BAAiqBbBiUrlV ؛k aqujo pjtqu 3UO s؛ B jn0٧؛qs؛33Bjd au س؛أبم sjood ^UBUU g-iv؛٧؟MOU ‘s„3M :u ؛asnsjp u؛ 33Bjd aqu ؛s ؛nj u؛"su su٧i٧3pd
S.3UUB3 JOJ ssodsj sapjAOjd UJ "SUOSBSJ uaquo JOJ puc aheunusEd aqu JO 3snB33٩ ااأ3 JO UJBd ااأ3؛ل SSJOJS ٧بمولو3UU03 ujnopag ^UBJ^ SuidaaqajBS JOJ اأ3ل3 س؛أبم ااأ3؛ل ٩30J) ٧3UU٥S S„3M JJBUUS JO jaquunu B puv؛S3UU اا31 ق؛ل3ل؛11٧ءة3 sujsodap UBABJBO d■ ،؛•، ssajuoj B scq Bigqnz‘ ؛jn٥jj s؛qs؛uno SJJSM Pipuajds auuos scq UJ 3u ؛u ااأ3 IJ3M B seq UJ 33Bgi pauBjndod
seq ,.IV ou pasn UJ •pa^ojsap U33٩ ٧3BJ„B UB 3٩؛IJSM ‘psdojsAsp (3A i{M؛USJJBJ 3ABIJ tp ؛nj OJU؛u
٧٧ l{M JO S((3M 3JE B٩Bb٧j_IB؛ODBjuns aqu tp ؛puv ‘UMOp JEJ Xjsa s n٩؛pi؛s3u jood ؛i{M u؛dn sSujjds J3٧BM aqu tp"
Bsthi ؛jnoy B s؛tjs؛33B(d au س٧بم aStq B puv (SJJSM U33MS seq UJ SS3JJJOJ B JeQ-iv(؟، "ssn qonuujo uotu 3JE jBtp SIJ3MJO uaquunu B scq seq BipiijSnwiV pauBUSBAop U33٩؛ ؛٧ -JJ3M 3UO seq س؛أبم؛٧‘ qooo JO س؛أبم ٧I ٧I ؛auuBS aqu IJB s؛
؛jp no^ uaquaqMjo ssajpacSsj ajjns no^ vaqjJBip aqu UUOJJ auuBU s٧؛٩u JO ؛٧‘ aqvq S.3UUB3 puv uauu JO؛ SUUE3JUS OMU 3JE 3J3q ؛u اا31 3 Piqءلااأ- دا31 J3p 33Bjd؛S3A ٧M٩nw، paounouap scq pory ؛٧ S٧I JOJ aqu suasooj tpiijM ‘J3٧BM pc٩ sj3MO٩ ل¥لل؟)ة؛s ؛u B u؛33 jods UUBSBSjd‘ س؛أبم U33MS JO SUUE3JUS OMU ١١.J3٧E ١١.؛qi JEU٧E٧؛qs-
٧s ‘OMU JO UUB3JUS B 3J31J :g٩JBf-(V؛٩u؛a٧BM 3u؛ ؛٧ ؛s ؛BSJB UM0j3j3A0 UK u) uotu saop ipnjAS (IJSM J3٧BM U33MS I tpnuu XJ3A MO٧ ل0لق3ا "33Bjd sjtpjo aUUBU aqu ؛s OMU aqu U33M٧a٩؛ P auuog "Stujcd؛UUOJJ 33UB٧S ؛٧ ؛UUB3JUS B s ؛B u اا1؛3٩3أ B puv ipnjAS JO 3UO SUUB3JUS OMU :qqBM.IV ؛uaquo aqu tump J3U33.MS s؛ peoj aqu J ‘J3٧BM U33.MS JO JBUBO B :Bq٧vpqnj4j-j٧؛p3U س٧بم ٩3BJ٩ "SUOJS
puns Xq papunojjns*
uaquo IJ3B3 ou ssop SUUB3JUS OMU :piUM٧j_I٧‘ q٧o٩ س؛أبم UJ •J3٧BA\ pc٩ ؛s دا1ء]؛ل: 3J3q J3٧BM ؛3JE JOU ‘poos uotu s ٧بمولوStuBSJJS ^UBUU" p U3A3 ^BUU puv ‘dn؛3"
¥ا¥؛سءلل، p seq pory؛p33Bj3s ؛٧؛ jp oqw 3UOĀUV؛J3٧BM aqu s٩u ٧بمولو SJJ3MS SJJ3M U33MS scq jXcqnAV؛ ؛B u ٩ل؛3اأاuods juBSBSjd p؛J3٧BM U33MS JO 33UBpUn٩B UB s3 •SMO٧
S33JJ uujvd puv J3٧BM scq JUUBIJQ-JV؛ Xq 3SOJ3 ؛atUOJI 3J31JM jods ĀpuBS B s
III
SNO!D3« 3HT JO 3D٥3٦MON^ د0لا SNOISIAia Lsaa 3HT
213
AN ACCOUNT OF THE DESERT OF THE BEDOUIN
people. It has springs, and wells, and ponds of middling water; some distance away is sweet water. This is without question one of the cities of al-HijllZ; but we arrived there via the route of al-Qadisiyya because of urgent necessity.
Addition/version MS. C: A SUMMARY ACCOUNT OF THIS REGION AND OF THE DESERT
You should know that this is an extensive desert, wherein are many Bedouin. Here are to be found no cultivated fields, no palm trees, except in the villages, and the village settlements here are sparse; sources of water here are also limited. In it grows a plant called thefathth, which sprouts up of its own accord; it contains a seed which resembles the mustard. The people gather it and take it to the brook, soak it in water, causing it to open up so that the pip comes out from that seed: this they grind, bake, and eat. It is in connection with this that al-Niqifflr (Nicephorus Phocas) said, when he took TarasOs: “Go back to the people of the fathth and the jerboa, and return our land of Syria to us.” A common practice here is the eating the flesh of the jerboa, and snakes. The people here are highwaymen, yet they give shelter to the stranger, and guide those who have gone astray; they also convoy caravans, and indeed, it is not possible for a person to travel this way without either a guard or some force. Sometimes you see them attack the Pilgrimage caravan, despite its strength, and their camels are taken away....
The people ofal-ʿʿrāq call all the land that is beyond the Euphrates River by the name of Syria, and it is with this understanding that Muhammad bin al-Hasan made the entry in his registers, in conformity with them, but there is no portion of Syria beyond the Euphrates except Qnnasrln. Most of the scholars in our science agree that the portion of this desert that is beyond the Euphrates is the Peninsula of the Arabs, and both al-Zuhrl and Abo Zayd al-Balkhl concur in this, and it is with this understanding that they represented it in their maps of the regions.
Beyond Faya is a town called al-Munhab, a place with many palm trees and cultivated fields; also Wildl Tayyiʾ, and the mountain areas of both these places have palm trees, villages, and agricultural products, Fayd being situated between the two of them. The route from al-Basra to Syria passes by both of these towns; from al-Munhab to Taymilʾ, four nights; from al-Munhab to Wildl Tayyiʾ, a journey of two nights, thence to Tabok, five nights.
So these then are the six regions of the Arabs, and their homelands; and in God-may He be exalted— success!
Now should some say to me, “You are a man who has devoted himself in his traveling to certainty and knowledge. You have become acquainted, moreover, with the routes over this desert and the watering places there. So what do you say about going on the Pilgrimage depending on God alone, and setting out without provisions?" The answer is that it is related Sufy:ln bin ʿAyyana that he said that two kinds of men there are who if they should ask your opinion you should strengthen their resolve, for they are asking you from a position of indecision; one is the bachelor who wants to marry, the other, the religious
p. 255
D
JO ااأ3 JO suogiau ااأ3 uou-٩BJ٧ sajdoad‘ ااأ3 usjy 3٩؛٧أج ااأ3 buqsBW-lBJo uoibou•
دا31 p usjy؛A؛S؛UO ؛MO((OJ :p3٧3giu٧٥3 s؛3u ؛٧ ؛s اا31 p puooos؛A؛S؛tpilpft (UO S٧E3J٧ ق؛ل3ل؛11٧ءة3 ٧IA\ JBoX UEqu}J B puv pooj 1؛p؛piUBD 3u•
BJ٧s3J؛u؛uu uo 3UU 3u^ ؛o3 ‘۵٧uno3 UMO Āuu JOJ uno U3S I ‘^mujno؛uo 3u ااأ3 333J sbm I pazqvaj I ool '3UU؛A؛ub 3u ؛au؛٧b٧؛u Xjoao uo؛٧q3‘ SEM pory jBtp puv b3b Abase 3UU paj puv 3UU؛٧SU uu^ س؛اا JO 33Bjd B ou ٧)3l؛3J31JM ‘sj اا31دE٧J3٧U3؛p3U s b؛JJ3Mp 3jau؛33S I PIP 3u ٧ا331 J 3AIJ 3J3M auaqu ‘J3A3M.H؛qoou OlJAt SJ3p ٧U3M I uo‘ ااأ3 cp 3u٧M0JJ0J^‘ J3ABJ٧؛1BjAcSnUB patpcaj I puun 3u ٧n٩ uotu B٧J3٧U3 puv؛3UU p3U
ds B 3UU pajjBO^؛ ٧n٩ uuaqu paj I UOIJM ؛u ااأ3 u3A3؛J3^Bjd 3u ااأ3د3UU OJ pazgiojodv UUOJJ dnoaS B SSOJOB 3UUB3 I UOIJM (j3^Bjd ا9وquMhew• داأ3د3s؛puv ‘auu paz U3UJB puun pajOABJU puv uuaqu UUOJJ XBASE paddjjs I UMEp ااأ3 ٧؛u3A3 aqujo 3U٧؛3u P puv ‘SBM atrlpUBUS؛٧U3J3JJ ٩؛B puv pooj JO spu ٧3٩UBJ٩ ٧v '5111 ou Ulginouq 3J3M 3UU P3UU03J3M puv 3UU p33EJ٩UU3 OlJAt' لا3 PJOU اا31 JO ajdoad اا31 ٧Bl{A\ JJOJ Auu ٧U3M I OJ ؛٧‘ J3٧u3 ^uu uo puv؛3u ااأ3 ‘tuajEsnuaf UUOJJ UBUU B SBM auaqu ‘joop U3A3 JO؛jatojd 3u‘ ٧n٩ jaddns 3ABJ3 JOU PIP I؛ 3UUB3 JJOJ B ^I(Bn٧U3A3 ؛A\31A OJU ٩٩vqs ‘juauujBa^ B puv ‘sjaddjjs 3JB٩pB3JlJ٧ 3٩ل3ا1؛3ل- I puun uo p3(3ABJ٧ اا31 ٧؛3UU Ā٩sj3SSBd auuos ou 3UU uo pcq I saquogt UBIJM 3ab3 I auaqu‘ ٩B٧؛B uuaqu UUOJJ 3u اأة؛ل .u ااأ3 I ^cp SuiAtuiioj P31J3B3J I puun p3(3ABJ٧ ااأ3 qoj ؛u ااأ3 puv ‘pooj UBjp puv 3٧B I OS ‘J3٧BM JO؛
اا31 U3A3؛٧S XjjunoDjo pBOjqjo JBOI B 3UU Ulginouq UBUU B J3^Bjd 3u^B puv (3J ؛an d ،؛؟ ااأ3 UOJJO spot I ‘Xnp aujwopoj ااأ3 JB٩٩ns-jB ou ajnoj؛^^B؛ PIES pcq I UOIJM puv pajoadxa J3A3U pcq I 3J31JM auaqu jaddns ؛٧- BS pcq I USIJM؛P ااأ3 ‘sa^vd UOOIU sapjAOjd J3A3٥qM ااأ3 apjAOjd II٧M pooj ااأ3 pcq I IP AY OSJB J31EM ااأ3 Xjoa JS3٩ ^3 Xjjbd OJ uotu papioop pvq I 33S no؛ااأ3ل dno B JO uod B س؛أبم UBqu PJBS I JOJ ‘auu ا3لااا31 anbsouu‘ اا31 zz3nu٧؛M٧IA\ 3UU ou 3UUB3 u B puv s3y puv pB3J٩ ؛J3٧EM JO JB؛ u Xub؛٧q3 ioujB Jt٧un■ ااأ3 agrees pucat.tm ااأ3 i٧3A3؛ooi J3^B٧d au ااأ3 pcq ajdoad SpjBMOU aujujnu اا31 JO J3UJ03 اا31 uotu pcq I ^Bjd ou anbsouu USBJ ^uu U3٩OJ٩ M؛٧noq٧ ۵JB3؛AOjd 3u؛s؛b٧j paqDBOJ I UOIJAV suo؛PIES I J ااأ3 u3A3؛‘js^Bjd 3u أ3لا 33Bjd B ؛u اا31 ٧scJ (UOOUJ3UJB؛UUJ3٧3p ‘3u؛SuiUUJOJJOd uo p3U اا31 ل٠؛اقل؛1ق3 JO A\ pB3J٩!uu B M٧؛dn paddBJM pooj uoq JO qsBuuqs ؛uuaqu u'؛؛ I ‘ujcd ^uu JOJ BS؛P اأ3:	JOS atriquatuos tuodn 3UUB3أauuos 3U3M auaqu ‘pjoqpo puv ٧B٧ S3٩B3
M Jjasap؛٧noq٧ AOjd؛s؛JOJJV 'suo اأ3 pcq s^cp aauqu uno U33٩ اأ3 j3unq SBM^‘ ٧n٩) ٧no٩B 3JU33SB UB ؛jnp ^Jjtunoo UMO jno u؛uu 3u^ ٧؛٧U3M OIJAS auaqu 3U٧ uno ؛OJU q٧؛s ٧no٩B sqsv OIJAS uuBJgisv o3؛uo 3u ااأ3 ق؛ا3ل؛٧لأءة3ا M؛٧noq٧ PJOU SEM I -sajjddns
tiz
SNO!D3« 3HL JO ao٥a٦^ON^ د0لا SNOISIAia Lsaa 3HL
AN ACCOUNT OF THE EIGHT REGIONS OF THE NON-ARAB PEOPLES
p. 257 IN THE NAME OF GOD THE MOST BENIGNANT, THE MERCIFUL
This is an account of the eight regions of the non-Arab peoples, and an exposition ofconditions there, arranged according to the boundaries. The people of these regions are in the most comfortable circumstances, are the richest, most powerful, strongest, best natured; the most firmly grounded in knowledge, the most deep-rooted in religion. They delight in doing good works, and in deeds accounted in the record of God. Rivers flow through their regions, trees enclose their villages. We shall give a detailed account of their qualities, comment on the conditions in their regions; and we present in this chapter what is necessary by way of introduction.
We have learned from Abu al-Mandhar Hisham bin al-Saʾib to the effect that when Qutayba bin Muslim [49/669 - 96/716] triumphed over Fayrūz bin Khusraw, he captured his daughter Shahin, and she had a basket with her; so he sent her to al-Hajjaj who took her to Walid, and he opened the basket. And behold, within it, in the name of God, Shaper of the world, was a differentiation made by Qubadh bin Fayrūz [ruled 488-531 C.E.] of the parts of his realm, assessing the quality of the waters and of the soils, with the intent of building for himself a city wherein he would dwell. He found that the best places in the territory of his realm, after beginning with al-ʿIrāq, which is the most pleasant of regions, he found, I say, that the best were thirteen places, in number: al-Madaʾin, al-Sūs, Jundaysabūr, Tustar, Sabūr, Isfahan, al-Rayy, Balkh, Samarqand, Abiward, Masabadhan, Mihrajanqudhaq, and Qarmasln.
He found the coldest places in his realm to be: Dabil, Hamadhan, Qazwln, p. 258 Juwaniq, Nihawand, Khwarazm, and Qaliqala. He found the most pestilential places to be: al-Bandanijln, Jurjan, Khwar al-Rayy, Kish, Bardhaʿa, and Zanjan.
He found the driest of his realm: Maysan, Dast Maysan, Badaraya, Bakusaya, Masabadhan, al-Rayy, and Isfahan.
He found the greediest among them: Khurasan, Isfahan, Ardabll, Badaraya, Bakusaya, Istakhr, Shlraz, and Fasa.
The most fertile: Armlniya, Adharbayjan, Jūr, Makran, Mah al-Kūfa, Mah al-Basra, Arrajan, and Dawraq.
The most beautiful places: al-Madaʾin, Kalwadha, Sabūr, Istakhr, Jannaba, al-Rayy, Qumm, Isfahan, and al-Nashawa.
The most intelligent among them, seven: ʿUkbara, Qutrabbul, ʿAqarqūf, al-Rayy, Isfahan, Masabadhan, and Mihrajanqudhaq.
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
216
The most despondent, the people of: Iskafayn, Kaskar, ʿAbdas, Marw, and al-Rayy.
The most knowledgeable in arms: Hamadhan, Hulwan, Isfahan, Shahrazūr, Khwarazm, al-Shash, and Isbljab.
The sources of the most palatable water, ten in number: Dijla, al-Furat, Jayhūn, Jundaysabūr, Masabadhan, Qazwln, and the water respectively of Sūra, Dhat al-Matamlr, and Fanja.
The most cunning, eleven in number: Khurasan, Isfahan, al-Rayy, Hamadhan, Armlniya, Adharbayjan, Masabadhan, Mihrajanqudhaq, Tustar, al-Madhar, and Artuwan.
The worst fruits: al-Madaʾin, Sabūr, Arrajan, al-Rayy, Nihawand, Masabadhan, and Hulwan.
The most shortsighted regarding consequences: al-Nawbandijan, Masabadhan, Slraf, Ramhurmuz, Armlniya, Adharbayjan, and Istakhr.
The basest people, six in number: al-Nawbandijan, Badaraya, Bakasaya, Wayhind, Nihawand, and Isfahan.
He did not find between the Tigris and ʿAqabat Hamadhan a more pleasant place than Qarmasln; so he built there a city for himself, and the succession of the Khusraw built it up after him, from al-Madaʾin to al-ʿAqaba, as you see.
I found in a book in the library of ʿAdhud al-Dawla a chapter dealing with p. 259 the gardens of the realm, written in rhyme, and I have added to it the name of any place that should not be omitted, on account of the distinction of its reputation and its excellence; and so that this chapter will gather together the recreation grounds of the earth, and gratify the hearts of people. It was said in the book that the place on earth most favored with natural resources is al-Rayy, where al-Surr and al-Sarban are located; the place with the finest reservoirs is Jurjan. The best known is Tabaristan. The best for the production of natural resources is Naysabūr, where Bushta(n)qan is placed. The best in antiquity and modernity: Jundaysabūr, where al-Aban is situated; Marw, where are (the canals) Raziq and Majan; the GhUta of Damascus where flows the Zarban. There are also Naslbln, which has al-Hirmas, and Jerusalem with al-Buqʿa and Mamas. At al-Saymara are the two forts, and in Fars, Shaʿb Bawwan; there is the river al-Ubulla, at which the eyes are caused to wonder, and do not have any doubt about the gardens of Sughd! There is Balkh with Barwan; Nihawand, and the gardens of Isfahan. In al-Bahrayn are Qaysariyya and ʿUman; in al-Yaman, remarkable Santaʾ. You need not ask about Jlruft in Kirman, or about Bust, and Mūqan. The countryside of Bukhara has great prestige, and we shall mention al-Shash, Fasa, Sabūr, and Hulwan. And the villages of al-Ramla without a river are illustrious for their olives and figs; we have mentioned to you too Tahart and Jayyan; and stretching from al-Kūfa is the river, with date palms, and trees, for a distance of two post stages. This is our account of the gardens of the world as we see them.
You should know that most of the towns of the non-Arab peoples are named after their founders and builders, and we shall refer to this as opportunity offers,
AN ACCOUNT OF THE EIGHT REGIONS OF THE NON-ARAB PEOPLES 217 if God,-may He be exalted-so wills. The speech of the people of these eight regions is other than Arabic, some of it pure and fluent, some incomprehensible. All of the languages, however, are called “Persian", but that there are variations is evident; the variety is a problem, but we will explain that as occasion arises, if God-may He be exalted-so wills, and we will facilitate the understanding of it, as best we can. We will mention from the speech of every people some of the sounds, so that anyone hearing it, who is distant from there, should be able to identify its place of origin. And in God is success.
The Region ofAl-Mashriq (The Eastern Territories)
This is die most important of die regions, die most sublime. Here are the most scholars. It is the source of wealth, the abode of science; the solid support of Islii.m, and its mightiest fortress. Its sovereign is the most illustrious of sovereigns, its army the best ofarmies. The people are ofgreat fortitude, correct in opinion. Their prestige is considerable, their resources extensive. They are renowned for their horses, their men, their conquests, their victories. They are a people such as were mentioned to CUmar that their dress is iron, their food, dried meat, their drink, ice. You see there very fine rural areas, beautiful villages, trees intertwined with one another, rivers flowing copiously. Blessings are evident there, fields extensive. In religious matters the people are correct, and justice abides, in a country ever firm in its victories, a realm God has made everlasting. Here the jurisprudents achieve the rank of kings; and people who were slaves here are kings elsewhere. It is the barrier to the Turk, the shield against al-Ghuzz [a Turkish tribe], a terror to the Romaeans, the glory of the Muslims. It is the wellspring of stability, the source of invigoration for the two holy places; here is the country situated on both sides of the river. Even though the Peninsula of the Arabs is more spacious than this area, yet the latter is much more developed, has more villages, wealth and business.
Abū Zayd has divided it into three regions: Khuril.sil.n, Sijistan, Mil warā'a al-Nahr [“the area on the other side of the river (Jayhūn)"]. We, for our part, however, make one region of it, consisting of two parts separated by the river Jayhūn, and we associate with each part the person who planned and built it. We have depicted and described each part by itself, because of the size of the region, the extent of building there, the number of its villages and towns. Now should someone ask, “Why do you not make each part a region by itself in accordance with accepted usage; or do you not know that they refer to ʿKhurāsān, and Mil. warāʾa al-Nahe'?" I should reply that it is also accepted usage that from the boundary of Qumis to Taraz is called Khurasan, or, moreover, do you not know that the dynasty of Sii.mil.n are called the kings of Khuril.sil.n, their residence being on this side, even though we do not call this side Khuril.sil.n; so that what I have said enforces our argument. Again, should someone say, “Why did you include Sijistan in this region, thus disagreeing with the predecessors in this branch of knowledge?" I should say to him that it is also accepted usage that Sijistan is part of Khuril.sil.n, or does he not know that the people of Sijistan give allegiance to the dynasty ofSii.mil.n; moreover, if we were to make Sijistan a region, then we should make Khwarazm a region considering the progression of its development, the number of its towns, the variety of its speech, and the nature of its customs-but this is not feasible, and should not even be suggested.
p. 260
219
THE REGION OF AL-MASHRIQ
If someone should ask why we made the region two parts, it should be said p. 261 that it is just as al-Yaman is two parts, and al-Maghrib two sections: thus there is precedent for it.
You should know that the two brothers Haytal and Khurilsiln, two sons of ʿAlim bin Silm bin Noh settled in this region, and this side of it is called the side of the Haytal people.
The Province of Haytal (Right Bank offcyhūn)
You should know that this province is the most fertile of the lands of God -may He be exalted-its people are the most prosperous, have the greatest knowledge of jurisprudence, have the most buildings, and the most avid desire for knowledge. They are the most correct in religion, the most courageous, the most obdurate, most persistent in striving in the way of God, yet the most peaceful at heart, the most generous among mankind; they evince prosperity, integrity, fairness, hospitality, respecting those who learn. In summary, Islilm there is extolled, rule is strong, justice is plain to be seen, the jurisprudent is famed, the rich man is safe, the professional man is learned, the poor man still can meet his needs. Rarely do they suffer drought. The mosques here are greater in number than can be mentioned, areas more spacious than can be described; even so we did our level best, to the limit of our capacity.
Addition/version MS. c.
From enemies they are secure. Pulpits (i.e. towns) in the area are many, districts spacious. Here is the town al-Sughd, the precious, and Samarqand, the splendid, and Khujanda, the remarkable. Here are schools, leaders of the prayers, elders, honourable people, with good management, government, conquests, valiant people, caravanserais, and horsemen. Here are grapes and fruits, servitude and oppression, studies night and day. The people are always under tutelage and guardianship, delighting in refinement, and researching the Hadlth [the authoritative sayings and doings of the Prophet and his Companions]; for it is the territory of the holy strife against the infidels, the place of the troops defending the frontier; of the people who adopt the right belief; no heretical doctrines are manifest, no conditions of injustice. Here are precious minerals, many caravanserais, excellent waters, with security and well-being. However, corruption has come in evidence there, and usury among the people is notoriously widespread. Every villain has crossed over into there, and I fear me that it will become like al-ʿʿrilq or even worse, that al-Islilm will fold up its mantle there as the report has it, while around their ruler is a group of superior people, the likes of al-Shaykh ʿAll bin al-Hasan, and other persons of distinction in the entourage.
The following is a representation of the form and features of the region. [Map XI]
jaipsissnajd ؛(SunjpiqBjuauo ‘uqjsg ‘zjisaqjnqn.
عل0لاا sw ةهلولاةول ؟-q K09 ipJEMiqv^ ٩؛ujj9d pu؛ss؛0 U0ولااو is؟؟qsi؛١q؛٩9qjo IV :IK dm؟	.d oos) jq.N.l* ح٠لع)٠
3 لا0103لآةHL AO AOQTIMON^ د0لا SNOISIAia 1S39 3HL	ozz
221
THE REGION OF AL-MASHRIQ
We have divided this province into six districts and four cantons, the first of them towards the point where the sun rises, and the boundary with the Turks, being Farghilnil, then Isbljiib, then al-Shilsh, then Ushrūsana, then al-Sughd, then Bukhilra; and regarding al-Sughd there is much to be said. The cantons are Ilaq, Kish, Nasaf, al-Saghaniyan.
As for Farghana, it is an area in a corner of the region, on the east side, before you reach the downward slope. It is quite prosperous, and there are said to be forty mosques there. Its capital is Akhslkath, and among its towns are al-Miyii.nrūdhiyya (Miyii.n Rūdhan), Nasrabadh, Manāra, Ranjad, Shikit, Zarakan, Khayralilm, Bishabishiln, Ushtlqiln, Zarandarilmish, Ozkand. Among the towns of Nasii. are Osh, Qubil, Birink, Marghlnan, Rishtan, Wankat, Kand. Among the towns of Wii.ghaz are Būkand, Kiisiln, Biib, Jarak, Usht, Tūbkar, Uwii.l, Dakarkard, Nawqii.d, Muskiln, Blkan, Ishkhijiln(?), Jidghil (Jadghal), Shawadan. Isbljii.b is at the boundary of the region, equable in climate. The capital has the same name, and among its towns are: Khūrlūgh, Jamshalii.ghū, Arsubilnlkath (Usbanlkath), Bilrab, Shilwaghar, Sawrii.n, Turii.r Zarakh, Shaghlajii.n, Billiij, Barūkat, Barūkh, Yakankath, Adhakhkath, Dih Nūjlkat, Tarilz, Billuwil, Jikil, Barskhan, Utlukh, Jamūkat, Shiljl, Kūl, al-Sūs, Takabkath, Dih Nawii., Kūlan, Mlrkl, Nūshkat, Laqril, Jamūk, Urduwii., Nawlkath, Balilsaghūn, Labiln, Shūy, Abiiligh, Mii.dii.nkat, Barsiyiln, Balgh, Jikarkan, Yagh, Yakaligh, Ruwiinjam, Katilk, Shūr Jashmah, Dil Awiis, Jarkard.
Al-Shii.sh is beyond these two, its capital Binkath. Among its towns are Nukkath, Jiniinjakath, Nujiikath, Binilkath, Kharashkath, Gharjand, Ghannii.j, Jabūzan (Jamūzan], Warduk, Kabarna, Namdawilnak, Nūjkath, Ghazak, Anūdhkath, Bishkat, Barkūsh, Khiltūnakath, Jabghūkath, Farankad, Kadii.k, Nakii.lak, Bilrskath, Ushtūrkath, al-Baykath, Kabii.shkath, Ghannilj, Dih Kūrii.n, Tall Awsh, Ghuzkard, Zarii.nkath, Darwii., Faradkath, Ajakh.
Ilaq, its district and chief centre is Tonkath. Among its towns are Shii.wakath, Biinkhii.sh, Nūkath, Bii.lilyii.n, Arbilakh, Namūdhlagh, Tukkath, Khumrak, Slkath, Kuhslm (Kūh-i-slm), Adakhkath, Khii.s, Khujilkath, Gharjand, Silmslrak, Biskath.
Ushrūsana adjoins this district. Its capital is Bunjikath, and among its towns are Arsubilnlkath, Kurdakath, Ghazaq, Faghkath, Sii.bii.t, Zilmln, Dlzak, Nūjkath, Qatawiln-Dizah, Kharaqii.na, Khisht, Marsmanda. It has seventeen rural districts: Bashilghar, Mashil, Burghar, Waqr, Biingham, Mlnak, Baskar (Baskan), Arsubilnlkath, and al-Buttam which has no towns: for the others, the names correspond to those of their towns.
The capital of al-Sughd is Samarqand, which is also the metropolis of the region. It has twelve rural districts of which six are south of the river: Bunjikath, then Waraghsar, then Maymurgh, then Sanjirfaghan, then al-Dargham, then Awfar. Those to the north are as follows, the uppermost of them being Yarkath; then Būrnamadh, then Bozmiljan, then Kabūdhanjakath, then Widhar, then al-Marzubii.n. In some of these are towns we shall ascribe to the rural areas;
262؟
p. 263
P. 264
p. 265
p. 266
222 THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS remaining towns of the area are Riyūdad, Abghar, Ishtlkhan, Kushaniya, Dabūsiya, Karminiya, Rabinjan, Qatawana.
Bukhara is a district not very extensive, nonetheless well developed and pleasant. A wall surrounds five of its towns. Its dimensions each way are twelve p. 267 farsakhs, it has no untilled land, no village left fallow. The name of the capital is Numūjkath; among its towns are Baykand, al-Tawawis, Zandana, Bamijkath, Khujada, Mughkan, Kharghankath, Khudimankan, ʿUrwan, Bakhsūn, Sikath, p. 268 Jarghar, Sishakath, Aryamithan, Warakhsha, Wazarmithan, Kamajkath, Fagharsin, Kashafghan, Nawidak, Warka.
Associated with it is the district of Kish, with towns Nawqad Quraysh, Sūnaj, Iskifghan; also Nasaf, with towns Bazda, Kasba; also al-Saghaniyan, with towns Darzanji, Basand, Baham, Zinwar, Borah, Rlkdasht, Banbab(?) (Banyab(?)), Shūman, Hanban, Dastajird. Bukhara has sixteen thousand villages. p. 269 There is some disagreement over these provinces and districts. Al-JayhanI says in his book that al-Sughd is like the image of a man: his head is Bunjikath, his two legs, al-Kushaniya. His back is Awghar (Abghar), and the soles of his feet Kabūdhanjakath and Tarkasfa. His hands are Maymurgh and Būzmajan. He fixed its dimensions at thirty-six by forty-six farsakhs. He said that its finest mosque is that of Samarqand, then Kish, then Nasaf, then al-Kushaniya, and so on. Someone else has said that the capital of al-Sughd is Ishtikhan, and he made it distinct from Samarqand.
Addition/version MS. c.
Some writers have associated Bukhara with al-Sughd, and argue that the river from its source to its debouchure is given the name “The River ofal-Sughd”; but if we wish to justify our own statement in the matter and give preponderance to it over others, our book would merely increase in length. We surely mention those other statements so that the reader of our book should know that we are not unaware of them. I have not originated anything except that it be based on science and experience; and indeed any man who has attained eminence in a science, and ranged far and wide in it, is permitted to use his own judgment, after exercising deliberation. Are you not aware that the Prophet-God’s peace and blessings be upon him-—heh he sent Mu'adh to al-Yaman, permitted him to act according to his own judgment in matters to which he did not know a verse of the Qurʾān or a Sunna [a saying or doing of the Prophet] that referred to them, and this is also what the leading jurists did. So for our part, we did not draw a comparison in this science of ours except as they did in the science of the Sharlʿa [canonical law of Islam], and we have reached the conclusion that we consider Samarqand to be the metropolis of al-Sughd, and that we differentiate Bukhara as one of its districts.
He also made Bukhara a part of al-Sughd, arguing that the river from its source to Bukhara is called the River of al-Sughd. This argument is wrong, however. Do you not know that the river ofJordan, in Palestine, is also called the Jordan
223
THE REGION OF AL-MASHRIQ
River, but no one claims that the valleys of Palestine are part ofJordan. When they mention the River al-Sughd this means only that it rises in al-Sughd, and irrigates the land there. In fact if we were to begin to argue about every opinion we express, and favour one argument over one that is equally sound it would merely lengthen our book. Our only aim in mentioning these other writings at all and explaining them is lest the reader of our book might think they were unknown to us. In fact Abū Zayd al-Balkhi in his book has a chapter which will spare people of discernment from arguing about this matter. He wanted in his work to confirm what he had mapped, but not the exact layout of the districts, for no one has preceded us in this detailing the districts of the regions; as he himself said, “There is no great benefit in the aggregation of these areas, putting one beside the other, and in differentiating among them nothing much is achieved, except merely to add the names of some towns and rivers there, and to facilitate exposition in presenting and mapping the area." And upon my life, he was right! This kind of argument neither invalidates nor confirms anything. Do you not know that leading scholars have presented their opinions, advancing on one point, then retreating; granting, as it were, then contradicting; allowing, then disallowing; permitting, then forbidding-and people have accepted this, and have been satisfied with it, and no intelligent person has denied them the right to do this. In fact the Prophet-God's peace and blessings be upon him-gave Mucadh authority to act on his opinions when he sent him to al-Yaman, and the Companions also acted in accordance with this. It is not anything remarkable, then, if we ourselves express some opinions in this science, or that we have our own frame of reference which we prefer.
Our preference is to make al-Sughd part of Samarqand and consider the towns of the former as towns of the latter; we appoint it, also, as the metropolis for this side of the territory, because it is older, more extensive, and has more rural districts. Should someone ask why we do not make Bukhara the metropolis since here is the royal residence and the administrative offices of the region, we should say to him that the presence of the kings there does not necessarily mean that it is the metropolis, just because Bukhara is a town favoured by the kings of the dynasty of Saman; in fact they went thither from Samarqand. Similarly it is not conceivable that we make Samarqand and Naysabor, because of their importance, chief cities of the province, over Bukhara; because for the reason you mentioned, it would be necessary to consider Naysabflr also a primary city over Bukhara. Of course someone may ask if it is not the case that when the family of al-ʿAbbas took up quarters in Baghdad, that city became the metropolis of the region, and should the analogy not apply to Bukhara; we should respond saying that the reply to this is easy. It is simply this: that the metropoles of al-ʿIrāq are of recent date, and under Islam one of them can replace the other. Do you not know that the metropolis used to be al-Kūfa; then it was al-Anbar, then Baghdad, then it became Samarra, then Baghdad again?
p. 270
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
224
Addition/version MS. c.
Al-ʿIrāq has but one capital. Do you not realize that it used to be al-Kūfa during the time of ʿAll, it then again became al-Anbilr at the time of al-MansOr, then again became Baghdad at the time of al-Mansūr, then it became Samarra at the time of al-Muʿtasim, thereafter returning to Baghdad.
On the other hand the metropoles of the eastern provinces are long established, and one does not invalidate the other. If someone should say, “but did not Naysabūr supplant Tūs?" we reply that Tūs was not a metropolis ever, so could not be replaced as such, and it [Naysabūr] was merely added to it [Tūs], for a reason we shall mention. Then if someone should ask whether we did not abrogate the primacy of Tūs as Tūs did Marw, we should reply that we have been on our guard about this by our saying that under Islam any of them could replace another, hence Naysabūr superseded Marw only by the advent of Islam. Since the matter is so, you see that Bukhara did not vacate Samarqand as metropolis, since we have not found a similar case in the basic principles of our science. Do you not know that because we do not find in the foundations of the jurisprudence that worship of God-may He be exalted-may be acceptable merely by one raka<, hence we do not allow for the witr to be acceptable by only one unit? Moreover, if someone says, “Is it not true that al-Maʾmūn, and al-Rashld before him, settled in Marw?" the answer is that they did not stop there with the intention of residing; this is perfectly clear.
Akhslkath is the capital of Farghilnii: a large, important town with trees all around it. The streams flow copiously there. It is a well developed, fertile area, and prices are low. It has an inner town penetrated by a number of canals which pour into reservoirs there. The town is well-built, of baked brick, gypsum, and lime. The mosque, and most of the buildings, are in the inner city. Extensive suburbs encompass a quhandiz and markets, and the circuit of the city is about one and one half times that of al-Ramla. Productive, though cold; the people here are rugged and ruddy.
Nasrābādh: a large town surrounded by trees-white willow and white poplar. A king . built it for his son, Nasr, and named it for him.
Maniira: a small town; a stream flows by the portal of the mosque.
Ranjad has many cultivated fields; an attractive mosque stands in the shoemakers' district.
Shikit: a large town, producing walnuts aplenty, so that you may even purchase a thousand walnuts for a dirham. The mosque stands in the market. Tishiln: large and populous; the mosque is in the cotton cloth dealers' district. Zarakiln: medium sized; produces much rice. It is a pleasant place, with copiously flowing water. At the portal of the mosque is a pleasant garden with trees.
Khayralam: a large town, with an attractive mosque in the markets. Bishabishan: a large town; the mosque has a gate that enters the open area of the market.
p. 271
p. 272
225
THE REGION OF AL-MASHRIQ
Ushtlqll.n: a small town; the mosque is in the markets.
At the gate ofOzkand is a stream through which one must wade, there being no bridge. A wall surrounds its suburbs. The town is well developed, having the markets, the mosque, and the quhandiz, with water flowing to all of them. It has four gates. I do not know in the towns of this area a quhandiz other than this.
Osh, with many streams nearby of excellent quality, is an extensive prosperous settlement. The mosque is in the center of the markets. The town lies close to the mountains, and is really well off, being very well watered. Here is a huge guardhouse, to which volunteer soldiers repair from all directions.
Quba is more spacious, extensive, better, more pleasant, more remarkable than the capital, and perhaps by analogy it should be the capital; however, with us, general usage has precedence over analogy, from the use of which we then refrain. The town has an open place in the centre of it, the mosque standing in the markets. The scholars have said: “Farghll.nll. is Quba; everything else there is grass and water."
Birink: a small town; its mosque makes the town conspicuous from the direction of Samarqand.
Marghlnll.n: also a small town; the mosque, remote from the markets, has a stream at its portal.
Rishtan: a large town. The mosque has a portal that opens on to the markets, and another opening on to the public square; Wll.nkat is similar.
At Kand is a stream that flows in the middle of the markets.
In this district forty towns were counted for me.
Khujanda: a delightful town, not a better one than it on this side of the territory. A stream flows through the middle; it is close to the mountain. The town is situated at the very boundary of the district. Scholars have praised it, and poets have described it.
Isbljll.b: an important capital, with suburbs. The city is well developed, having an inn for merchants, and a market for the cotton merchants. The mosque has four gates, a guardhouse at every gate: the Gate of Nūjakath, the p. 273 Gate ofFarrukhll.n, the Gate ofShll.krll.na, the Gate ofBukhara. The guardhouses: Ribat Nakhshabiyyln; Ribat al-Bukhll.riyyIn; Ribat al-Samarqandiyyln; also Ribat Qaratakln (Qaratigin) — and here, too, is his grave, and a market he donated to waqf. The proceeds from the market amount to seven thousand dirhams a month, and bread with food to accompany it is distributed to the feeble. It is said that two thousand seven hundred stalls for animals are here, for this is a very important mercantile centre. This is an area of fighting, and around the outskirts is a fortification. Here also is a quhandiz, but in ruin. The people know ofneither drought nor land tax, and among them fruit is extraordinarily cheap. It is a prosperous, good, delightful place, and the way of life is satisfying, even though there is continual clamour there. The people have integrity, but at heart they are crude. They are conceited about their traditions, and themselves, and you can feel this whether- you do good or bad to them. The people ofthe country districts
OS U3٨3 ؛٧ ؛zipuvifnb B OSJB SuiABlJ ‘paiJIUUOJ puc padojaAsp i(3M s• ؛uuBUJoduu‘ ٧n٩ iijBuusj UOIJM ٩؛pajanbuoo pBuuqv u ااأ3 E3JE ؛٧ p SBM؛uu؛u؛p3tjs-jds JO؛3u؛ Abuu UB3UU p3tuo٩ 3٩ ٧q3no٩ ou pasn UJ ivtfJtp B JOJ suuvw moj UB 3٩ a؟)mp uaquBiu B SuipR UMOU IJEIIUS B :uBupl.N I؛3u ااأ3 squuouu aauqu M squnqns padojaAsp IJ3M؛q٧؛3JE ipitjAt u ااأ3 suaquBiu؛ sasnoqpjBna ^UBUU
B :quBqtmpv لءلج3 M UMOU؛M ‘ssajjjoj B ip؛q٧؛ipitjAt u ؛s ااأ3 anbsouu؛ pun q pUB؛3J31JU 3JE 3ABjā s
٩bā؟auy Xjoa B :m٧b٩u ؛UMOU juBUJoduu‘ n٩؛٧i jgJBqqguBi^ Aq؛ q؛asnoqpjcna s B :qq.uvg لءلج3 UMOU PJO‘ ااأ3 anbsouu 3٩؛٧أج؛u ااأ3 ٧3٩jbuu-scq ssauuuoj SUJ JB3J tginouqu UUBJSJ ou P3JJ3AU03 OABIJ pa^ouusap U33٩
B :UBq.uvg لءلج3 UMOU‘ س٧بم gjBg؛ ٧u٥uj B؛b3b usod U3؛٧su ااأ3 د0ل٧0٩لأء٧أا oqw ؛u ااأ3 UUOJJ uaquBiu أبمول3 س3 PJBMOU paujtuaj ااأ3 IBUidBD
gjgg؛: UMOUIJEIIUS B ااأ3 JO SS3JJJOJ مبم،3بم scq pa^ouusap U33٩ داأ3 anbsouu ؛s puv ؛nb s؛3٧ snojadsojd
§اأء3األء؛ة٧أ: B لءلج3 uo UMOU ااأ3 spuBMOu iopuoij ااأ3 ^UJ •qguuj ؛‘paijiuuoj s P (Bunu؛J٧S؛٠٧0
اا31 UJ •s٩jr،l ؛33Bjd paiJIUUOJ IJEllUS B s س؛أبم qqgUBZ {.ztpuvtftlb B ؛OhellUA B s ؛u اا31 د0لةل E٧J3d UMOU B :qqgUBZ؛u؛E3JE (Bunu B ou 3u spjBMOu ‘uguMBg puo^3٩ b3b؛٧su ااأ3 zznqry (qguuj^ puB (znq3٠ [د0ل٩؛8اأ f S3٩٧I٧
M s٩m٩ns؛q٧؛uuaqu u داأ3 anbsouu ؛s ؛u ااأ3 Xjp uautri داأل5 UMOU ؛s ااأ3 1U0JJ؛J3 B :uguMBg لءلج3 M UMOU؛3UO SJJBM paijqjoj U3A3S ip qa٩؛pu ااأ3 sip ‘uaquo UUOJJ اا31 pvou UJEIIU
J3AO ؛٧؛ ااأ3 uo spuvus anbsouu ااأ3 uaquBiu aqu JO aSpa داأ3 UMOU ؛psAouuaj JEJ s ٥ B :UBlgiBMgMS btz لءلج3 SU3٧X3 UB f UMOU؛p (Bunu 3A؛J٧S؛٠٧0 SptUBJS SS3JJJOJ V (٧3tgioj٥؛3 ٧ipB٧٧؛uo)
n٩؛٧i داأ3دajdoad Suojus B 3JE‘ ااأ3 Biu؛٧i٧o^ ٥j uuaqu JO))JO s٧3MO الأ3 quipBH o3 3U3M SUB AY UMOU M3U B :UBpv^i؛sbm anbsouu s٧t uoq.vi uo 3u 3٩؛٧أج anbsouu ؛s ؛u ااأ3 ٧3٩JBU٧-
ISBAY؛: UMOU IJEllUS B؛ J3AO spuvus SS3JJJOJ B ؛٧؛ Jtm Suojus B japun■ داأ3 sdoqs IJEIIUS auuos 3JE ssauuuoj
suaquBuu auuos دلأ3 3JE suaquBiu aqu JO JSOUU puv :ztpuvijnb ؛u ااأ3 s٩m٩ns؛ ؛u ااأ3 s٧33٧٥ud ssauuuoj V S3JBUU puvsnoqu ^JU3A3S ؛٧ ؛tpiijM u ااأ3 puv ‘spuEjs anbsouu UMOU ؛puv ‘qgugg OSJB s q٧؛S ؛Xjuiej s لءلج3ا ٧Bindod B SuiAcq؛uo ؛pni3u؛٧no٩B 3u qgugg ؛s ااأ3 3AJSU3UX3 Xjoa uotu ،B3UB (Bunu BJO atlUBU؛ ااأ3 aqujo atlUBU ٩؛ةة3؟ا ؛u اا31 UMOU‘ اا31 S3J؛٧U3p؛E3JE IB ؛u اا31 ٠s٩jn٩ns
3 UB :(q٧Bqjug٩sft) q٧Bqjug٩ns٧vل3ةء٧أا‘ 33Bgi paijiuuoj ‘UB3J3 داأ3 anbsouu ؛s ااأ3 suaquBiu
qānouqu ؛٧- ^cd3J OABIJ SSABJS ^UBJ؛p3J ااأ؛ااأ3ل؛ ااأ3 anbsouu ؛P auuos s؛UUOJJ 33UB٧S B :oqagiBqsuuvf لءلج3 M0y UUB3JJS uuauBuujad B iput ‘UMOU snojocds؛3u J3AO UOIUBDIJIUUOJ ou ؛٧‘ q (Bunu ou ،2!tpuvtftlb ou؛pUBI٧3٧U
لآاأهلله3اأ: qānouqu 3u٧Moy UUB3UUS B f UMOU pazjs uunupauu B ااأ3 suaquBiu؛ uoq.vi daaqs ااأ3د١١3Sj3 3JE.3J3q'
3JE ٧3٧٧3٩ uvqu ااأ3 dB3 aqujo ajdoad؛auuoq UB SUOJI SB 33S no^ uuoqM ‘iB٧‘ ٧n٩ SB
9ZZ
SNOioan 3HL JO ao٥a٦^ON^ د0لا SNOISIAia Lsaa 3HL
227
THE REGION OF AL-MASHRIQ
Taraz: an important fortified town with many gardens. The houses are there side by side. A trench surrounds the town, which has four gates, and well developed suburbs. A large stream flows by a portal of the madina, beyond it a portion of the town over which the high road runs. The mosque is in the markets.
Jikil: a small town within shouting distance of Taraz. Over it stands a fortress; it has a quhandiz; the mosque is in the market.
Barskhan: a town about twice the distance of a shout, towards the east. It has a fortress, which has been destroyed; the mosque is in the markets.
Bahlū (Baluwa) is bigger than Barsukhan; to the north ofJikil half a farsakh; has five rural districts associated with it, also a quhandiz; the mosque is in the markets.
Utlukh: an important town close, in extent, to the capital; with a fortress. The area consists mostly of gardens, and the rural area, for the most part, produces grapes. The mosque is in the town, the markets in the suburbs.
Jamokat: large, with a fortress within which stands the mosque; the markets are in the suburbs.
Shiljl: a small town; many emigres here-some ten thousand said to be from Isfahan alone. It has a quhandiz, with the mosque outside it. The town is situated among the mountains. A stream flows through the courtyard of the mosque; nearby are seven villages.
Al-Sos: a large town; Kol is smaller than it; each one of the two has a fortress, and a stream.
Takabkath: a large town; one half of its people are heathen. These three are towns close to the mountains, sources of silver.
Kūlan: a fortified place, with a mosque. It has, however, declined. It is on the high road to Taraz.
Mlrkl: medium sized in extent; fortified; with a quhandiz. The mosque was formerly a church. The amir, ʿAmld al-Dawla Faʾiq, built a guardhouse outside the fortress.
Urduwa: a small town wherein resides the sovereign of the Turkoman; he still sends presents to the ruler of Isbljab. A fortress stands over it and a trench full of water surrounds it. The residence of the king is in the quhandiz.
In Harran most of the people are heathens, its ruler, however, is Muslim. It has fortifications in which is a quhandiz, where the dihqān [village head and tax collector] resides.
Walasakūn (Balasaghon): a large, populous, prosperous town; the remaining towns here are fairly close to one another in size and population.
Binkath: the capital of al-Shash, wide in extent; spacious residences, rare is the house without its garden, stable, and vineyard. In general terms, it may be described as a place where the good matches the bad, where the glory matches the faults; here is goodness, with discord; beauty of speech, with the vilest disorder; no matter how well developed you see it, you also see dilapidation there. In religion it is upright, but also in a state of confusion. The people are
p. 27s
276.؟
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
228
Sunni, but factional; they are a people of vigour and discord; they are an asset to the ruler, but they are of concern to him. The good people among them are excellent, the bad among them vile. They delight in knowledge, but are conceited in their sectarianism. They pass judgments on the evildoers, but their sentences are light. They are a pleasant people, but unfeeling; they are bold, at the same time stupid, combining generosity with bluntness. Though it is very cold here, fruits are plentiful; wages are low, but prices are low. The city measures about a farsakh in both dimensions; however, the gardens are as we have mentioned. There are suburbs in two areas of the town, at each place a fortress. The gates of the city are: Bab Abi al-ʿAbbās; Bab Kish; Bab al-Janbad. The quhandiz is beyond the city, and has a portal that opens on the city, and a portal on to the suburbs. There are eight main roads [darb] in the inner suburbs: Darb Ribat Ahmad; Darb al-Hadid; Darb al-Amlr; Darb Farrukhan; Darb Sorkadah; Darb Karmabaj; Darb Sikkat Khaqan; Darb Qasr al-Dihq:In. Through the outer suburbs are seven main roads: Darb Farghakad; Darb Khasakth; Darb Sandijā; Darb al-Hadid; Darb Barkardaj:l; Darb Sakrak; Darb Dar Thaghrabadh. The mosque is beside the wall of the quhandiz, most of the markets being in the suburbs.
Ushtiirkath is like Binkath in extent. Over it stands a fortress; a stream flows through the town; excellent inns.
Binakath is like Ushtūrkath; the people are troublemakers; no fortress; the mosque stands in the market.
Jinānjakath has no fortress; the buildings are of wood and clay; the remaining towns are close to what we have described-they have streams flowing through them, and trees encircling them.
Tūnkath is on a bluff; large, populous, it is the capital ofllaq. Its quarters are developed, and it is about half the size ofBinkath. It has a quhandiz, an inner city, suburbs, the administrative buildings being in the quhandiz, the mosque outside it. In the inner city are some markets, the others being in the suburbs. A stream runs through the inner city; a good, prosperous place, with a powerful dihqān.
Bunjikath: the capital ofUshrOsana; extensive, fertile, and important. Water is abundant here, the population large; surrounded by gardens. The houses are attractive, as we mentioned about al-Shash, except that these people are purer of heart, and there is little confusion. It has an inner city, with two gates—the City Gate and the Upper Gate. The mosque is within the city, the quhandiz outside. The suburbs are extensive, having four roads: Darb Z:lmin; Darb Marsmanda; Darb Nūjakath; Darb Kahlabadh. Six streams flow through it, similar to the large river, which flows beside it. It is a superb and really delightful place.
Zamln: in two sections between them a stream with small bridges over it. The mosque is on the right on the road that leads to Samarqand; the markets are on both sides of the stream. The town is on the high road.
Sabat: populous. Most of its markets are covered by low ceilings. A spring is here with a constant flow of water. Gardens surround the town, and a number of routes converge here.
277,؟
229
THE REGION OF AL-MASHRIQ
Marsmanda: an important place, with running water; without gardens; the cold is severe. It has markets. A populous town, the mosque is in the direction of the markets.
Khisht: situated among mountains; populous, with fertile villages, close to the silver mines. The remaining towns are close to what we have already described.
Samarqand is the capital of al-Sughd, the metropolis of the region-a splendid, important, ancient town, a brilliant and elegant metropolis; comfortable, with numerous slaves; abundant water from a deep river; buildings are strong, high, and solid. The adherents of the groups [Hanafites and Shafiites] hold frequent assemblies. The mode of life is pleasant, routes lead to it, commodities are carried thither from every distant place. The sciences flourish there, and the learned man is honoured. Here is an abundance of horses, men, and wealth. Around here are important rural areas, delightful towns, trees, and rivers. Residents and merchants meet here. In the summer it is paradise, and the people are adherents of the Congregation and Sunna; here is kindness, charity, prudence, zeal. However, in the disposition of the people and the climate, is frigidity; roughness towards strangers, distress in wintertime. They riot against their leaders, and are boastful, vain, and quarrelsome. The young women are faultless, the youth, base.
The capital is situated on the river, in the middle of it an inner city with four gates: Bab al-Sin; Bab Nawbahar; Bab Bukhara; Bab Kish. There are eight roads through the suburbs: Darb Ghadawad; Darb Isbask; Darb Sūkhashin; Darb Afshlna; Darb Kohak; Darb Warsanln; Darb Riyodad; Darb Farrukhshld. Buildings are ofclay and wood; and the most frequented place there is the Raʾs al-Taq (head of the arch). The mosque is in the inner city beside the quhandiz, most of the markets in the suburbs. A moat surrounds the inner city, the water carried to it by leaden pipes that are above the trench.
Bunjikath: a rural area; producing much fruit; fertile; surrounded by trees, walnut and other.
Waraghsar is the name of both a rural area and a town together; downstream from Bunjikath.
Maymurgh-not among all the rural districts is there one with more villages, trees, and natural products, than this. It used to be the residence of al-Ikhshid, king of Samarqand, and his palace is there.
Sanjarfaghan: a small rural district with few villages; however, it is quite populous, the best of the rural districts in climate and fruit. Its length is about two stages.
Al-Dargham: the most fertile of the rural areas, with the most pasture and water. Its length is about one stage.
Awghar (Abghar): a rural area, most of it irrigated by rain. It has many villages; the people are livestock farmers; its length, about two stages. The farming returns in a good year are said to be worth those of all the rest of al-Sughd, or of two years production in Bukhara.
p. 278
p. 279
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
230
Yarkath: the northernmost rural area, bordering Ushrosana. The drinking water is from wells; much pasture irrigated by rain; the farms are naturally fertile. Biirnamadh: a small district with few villages.
Biizmajan adjoins Yarkath; its chieftown, Abarkath. It is the most extensive rural district of this area, also that with most villages. It measures a stage in each dimension.
Kabodhanjakath-here the villages and the trees are continuous. Its chief town has the same name.
The chief town of Widhar has the same name; many farms; it consists of plain and hill, some naturally watered and some irrigated lands.
Al-Marzuban has no mosque.
Kushaniya and Ishtlkhan: two important towns-you need not ask about the fineness of these towns, their development, their natural production. They are in the province of al-Sughd, by all accounts. The length of the rural district of Ishtlkhan is five stages, its width, one stage. The width of al-Kushaniya, about two stages; its length the same. Both these places are towards the north. Addition/version MS. c.
... and this makes six rural districts. Both al-Jayhanl and Abo Zayd have gone beyond in the description of Samarqand and its districts, so as to spare us the necessity of reporting or re-iterating it; and if they had described the realm of al-Islam as they described al-Sughd it would have excused us from compiling this book. The remaining towns ofthis area are at the edge ofthe territory ofal-Sughd, and you need not ask about their goodness, attractiveness, and spaciousness. Numiijkath is the capital of Bukhara. It resembles al-Fustat in smelliness, in the blackness of its soil, and the extent of its markets. It resembles Damascus in its buildings, and its inner city; in the crowding of its houses, and the small lodging rooms with windows looking out over the street. Situated on a plain, it is growing every day. The inner city is very well developed, and has seven gates, plated in iron: Bab Nor; Bab Hufra; Bab al-Hadid; Bab al-Quhandiz; Bab Bani Saʿd; Bab Bani Asad; Bab al-Madlna. Beyond the city is a quhandiz, of which the ruler has taken possession; it contains their treasury and the prison. The building has two gates-Bab al-Sahla (the Gate of the Plain) and Bab al-Jamiʿ (the Gate of the Mosque). The mosque is in the city, and has a number of wide open areas in it, all of them clean. All its mosques are magnificent, its markets superb. The suburbs have ten roads: Darb al-Maydan; Darb Ibrahim; Darb Mardakshan; Darb Kilabadh; Darb Nawba(k)har; Darb Samarqand; Darb Faghaskūn;Darb al-Ramīrhaniyya; Darb Hadshariin; Darb Ghushaj. The development, however, has gone beyond even these. Inside the city are ten other roads, now in disuse, where the city developed formerly; some of the names of these roads are now different. The residence of the king is on the plain, facing the quhandiz, the back of the house being towards the Qjbla; and I have never seen in the realm of Islam a more beautiful, more admired door than that on
p. 280
P. 281
231
THE REGION OF AL-MASHRIQ
the mosque; neither is there in this region a town more developed, with greater throngs of people living there. Blessed is he who goes there, it refreshes him who lives there, and there is kindness in him who resides there. The foods are wholesome, the baths excellent, the streets wide; the water is digestible, buildings elegant, and there is companionship in the eating houses and the inns. Fruit is plentiful. The topics brought before their councils are remarkable, and so the populace gains knowledge of the law, and refinement. Those who guard the nation for the cause of God are many; ignorant people are few. Here is the residence of the kings of the Muslims.
Addition/version MS. c.
. . . it is the centre of well-grounded scholars, no one preaches there unless he
bo a jurisprudent or an exegete. You do not see the tax collector of any group
committing abuses under the justice of the ruler; and the people lead lives of
ease and comfort in security and propriety.
However, the houses are cramped, conflagrations are common, it is stinking and flea-ridden. There are extremes of heat and cold, salty wells, polluted rivers, and noxious lavatories. The disposition of the people is repulsive, the houses are expensive. Dank bazaars, flagrant sodomy, this is the dunghill of the area, and the most depressed city of al-Mashriq. Thither have repaired people steeped in vice, who corrupted the way oflife, disdained the communal meetings. Hirelings took over who dressed in silk and brocade, drinking from vessels of gold and silver, belittling the matters of religion.
Tawilwls: an important place, a market is held every year. Its fortress has been destroyed, its mosque is remote from the town. Its marketplace is quite long; a prosperous place.
Zandana: towards the north; many villages around it; a fortress, within it the mosque; its suburbs are well developed.
Khujada: a large town, over it a fortress within which is the mosque; an attractive, elegant place.
Mughkan has a fortress, handsome suburbs, an elegant mosque. A stream flows through it; many villages around.
Bamijkath is as we have described; and these five towns are inside the encircling wall.
Baykand is towards the Jayhon River at the edge of the sandy desert; it has but one gate. In the fortress is a busy market, and a mosque, of which the mihrāb is decorated with jewels. Below the town are suburbs, with a market having about a thousand stalls, some old, some new. This town has many excellences, among them the splendour of its mosque.
Afshana: towards the west; frequently raided; a busy attractive place.
Amdlza: to the west of Baykand, on the edge of the desert; it has a fortress.
Oshar: an extensive settlement with many gardens. It lies in the direction of the Turks; accounted a village.
p. 282
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
232
Riyamithan (Aryamithan) is the old Bukhara; a large town, its outskirts destroyed.
Barakhsha (Warakhsha): large, with a fortress; around it runs a trench filled with water.
Zarmithan has a quhandiz, also a fortress; the mosque is in the middle of the city.
Wakhsun (Bakhsun): large, with a fortress and a quhandiz.
The remaining towns are much as we have described, and here also are large villages that do not lack the customs and the facilities of the cities, except in the matter of having a congregational mosque. They do not have the mosque, as the amir lives in Bukhara, and he is the one having access to the ruler. The one whose opinion is followed there is Abu Hanlfa, and, of course, among us [i. e., followers of Abu Hanlfa] neither the jum'a [congregational prayer] nor the tashrif(taslim) [closing benediction] may be performed except in a metropolitan mosque, where the legal penalties could be administered. How hard the people of Baykand worked before they could build a mosque!
Kish is a large town consisting of an inner city and suburbs, and further development is connected with it beyond those. The inner city and its quhandiz are in ruin. The outer city is well developed, the administration buildings being outside the inner city. The mosque is in the ruined inner city, the markets in the suburbs. The buildings are of clay and timber, as in Bukhara. This is a fertile area, and from here are brought the first fruits of the season. The inner city has four gates: Bab al-Hadld; Bab CUbayd Allah; Bab al-Qassabln (the gate of the butchers); Bab al-Madinat al-Dakhila (Inner). The outer city, two: Bab al-Madlnat al-Khārija (Outer); Bab Biraknān. There are two large streams here, Nahr al-Qassarln (the stream of the fullers), and Nahr Asrud, which flow near Bab al-Madlna. This is a splendid city but for the fact that it is plague ridden.
Nasaf-they call it Nakhshab-is a delightful city; it has a quhandiz in ruins, populous suburbs. Situated on a plain, the river flows through it, the administration building being on its bank near the end of the bridge. It has suburbs wherein stands the mosque, close to where the markets are. It has a profusion of superb grapes, fine fertile farms. A large place; however, water is scarce, and sometimes the river stops flowing. The people there are a rabble, among them the most vicious fanaticisms; they are a bad people, deserving to be arrested and punished.
Kasba is bigger than Nasaf, Bazda smaller.
Al-Saghaniyan is a district very well developed, with an abundance of agricultural produce; the capital city has this name also. The capital resembles al-Ramla, though the latter is somewhat better. The district is like Palestine except that the latter is more extensive. The drinking water is derived from rivers which flow into the Jayhun River; however the tributaries are interrupted part of the year. The district abuts the area of Tirmidh, and has mountains and plains; on its borders are peoples called Kljl, and Kinjina, who are Turks. The
p. 283
233
THE REGION OF AL-MASHRIQ
district contains sixteen thousand villages, and provides about ten thousand warriors with their provisions and riding animals, should foreigners attack the ruler.
The markets of the capital are elegantly covered. Here bread is cheap, meat plentiful, water abundant. The mosque is in the centre of the market; it is a fine building with walls of baked brick, without arches. In every house is running water. Trees encircle the city, and here are different kinds of birds which are hunted. In winter it is an excellent place, with an abundance of rain and snow, herbage so remarkable that the animals disappear in it! The people are Sunni Muslims, loving the stranger and the upright; however, here are few learned men, and the place is devoid of jurisprudents.
Dilrzanji: a fine populous town, towards the Jayhon River. Most of its people are wool makers, and they make clothing. The drinking water is derived from a river. The mosque stands in the midst of the markets. Another stream p. 284 runs at the edge of the town.
Basand, towards the mountains, a spacious town with many gardens; Sankarda is similar to it.
Al-Shomiln: one of the leading cities of the area; fine, populous.
Dastajird: a large town situated between two streams, tributaries of the Jayhon River.
Quwildiyiln resembles other districts on the Jayhon River that we have mentioned in commenting on the districts; the remaining towns of al-Saghilniyiln are fine populous places.
An Account of the Jayhon River and the Settlements on it
This river, the Jayhon, cuts through the region and flows into Buhayrat Khwilrazm [Aral Sea]. Important districts lie along it, a number of towns stand on it. Several branches flow out from this river, and six streams flow into it. The districts are: al-Khuttal; Quwildiyiln; Khwilrazm; the towns are: Tirmid; Kalif; Nawldah; Zamm; Firabr; Amul. We shall describe the entirety before beginning our commentary on the districts ofKhurilsiln, because some people refer to these places as “Mil warilʾ al-Nahr", (the area beyond the river), and the remainder of Haytal as “Balad al-ʿAjam," (the country of the Persians), as far as the boundary with the Turks. On the other hand, some consider Khwilrazm to be part of the territory of Haytal, even though the largest cities in this area are in Khurilsiln. For our part, we are wary of such elaborations in these matters-but in God is success!
As for Khwilrazm, this is a district on both banks of the Jayhon River. Its greater capital is in Haytal, but there is another capital in Khurilsiln. The people on both sides of the river differ in customs, language, disposition, and natural characteristics. This is an important area, expansive, with many cities extensively built up, somewhat after the manner of the cities of the Romaeans, of Sijistiln, or
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
234
ofKiizarūn. The rows of houses are continuous, as are the gardens; here are many grape presses, farms, trees. Fruits and other agricultural products are considerable articles of commerce. The people have understanding, knowledge, law, talent, refinement; and it was rarely I found anyone eminent in jurisprudence, culture, p. 285 and knowledge of the Qur3iin who did not have a student from Khwiirazm— every student presenting himself and applying himself to his work. However, the people here suffer from obstinacy, and lack grace, elegance, gallantry, kindness. Their loaves ofbread are short, theirfarsakhs long. God-may He be exalted-has favoured them with low prices, fertility, bestowing on them also correctness in reading, and understanding. They are a hospitable people, but gluttonous. They are powerful, strong in war, and have remarkable characteristics.
It is said that in olden times the king of al-Mashriq grew angry with four hundred men of his kingdom, especially at his court, and he ordered them to be taken to a place removed from civilization, so that they would be a hundred farsakhs removed; and this happened to be about the location of Kiith. After a considerable period of time he sent some people who would present him with a report on them; and when they arrived there, they found them alive, having built huts for themselves, and they saw them fishing for their sustenance; here also was plenty of firewood. When they returned to the king and told him about this said he, “What name do they call ‘meat'?" Said they, “Khwiir." “And firewood?" Said they, “Razm." Said the king, “I have caused them to settle in that area, so I name it Khwiirazm." Moreover, he ordered four hundred Turkish maidens to be brought to them, so that to this day there remains among them resemblance to the Turks.
Now it had happened that when the king exiled them to Khwarazm he had directed a canal from the mainstream of the Jayhūn River thither for their daily needs; the mainstream flowed to a town beyond Nasa, named Balkhiin. The prince of Balkhiin arrived at the settlement of Khwiirazm, once, and observed there a people ofgreat fortitude; at any rate, the king of the Khwiirazm caroused and dallied with him, and won over him in gambling. The condition had been that the prince would open the river for them a day and a night, and he fulfilled his promise. But when he released the water it overwhelmed everything around, and it was not possible to contain it again; so it has remained in its new course to this day. In fact they have dug canals from it and built towns on it. Balkhan was deserted, and I have heard some ofthe people of Nasa and Abiward mention that they go to Balkhiin and bring back from there eggs aplenty, together with cattle and beasts of burden that have become feral.
I asked: “Why do your heads differ from those of other people?" Said they, “Our ancestors did three things by which they overcame the people of other nations. In the first place, they used to go on raids against the Turks, and, in fact, p. 286 were lenient with them. Now, some of them, themselves, looked like Turks, and they did not know but that eventually they would fall into the hands of [other] Muslims who would sell them into slavery. Accordingly they ordered that their
235
THE REGION OF AL-MASHRIQ
women, on giving birth, should bind sacks ofsand on the boys' heads on both sides, so that the head would flatten; by doing this they would avoid being enslaved, and anyone of them who was captured was returned to his district.
“The second thing they did was to convert the dirham into four separate parts, to prevent the merchants from taking the dirhams away from them. Indeed, to the present day, any silver that is brought in here is not allowed out." I have forgotten the third thing they did.
You should know that Khwarazm, measuring eighty farsakhs by eighty, in the region of al-Mashriq, resembles Sijilmasa in al-Maghrib, the natural disposition of the people of Khwarazm being like that of the Berbers. Here the houses adjoin one another, the rivers flow copiously, here is an abundance of fish and sheep. Here is the entrepot of the Ghuzz, and the Turks. The name of the largest capital here is Kath; while among the cities in Haytal are: Ghardaman; Wayikhan; Ardhakhlwa; Nawkafagh; Kardar; Mazdakhqan; Jashlra; Sadūr; Zardokh; Qaryat Baratakin; Madkaminiyya.
The name of the Khurasanian capital is al-Jurjaniyya; among its towns are: Nozwar; Zamakhshar; Rūzawand; Wazarmand; Daskakhan Khas; Khushmlthan; Madamlthan; Khiwa; Kardarankhas; Hazarasp; Jiqarband; Jaz; Darghan; Jit; Jurjaniyyat al-Sughra; another Jit; Sadfar; Masasan; Kardar; Andarastan.
Kath, which the people call Shahrastan, is riverine, about the size of Naysabūr; it lies on the east side of the river. A mosque stands in the midst of the markets, with columns of black stone the height of a man, above which are wooden pillars. The administrative offices are in the center ofthe town, there being also a quhandiz which the river had left in ruin. Streams flow through the town, which is indeed magnificent, having scholars, litterateurs, prosperity, agricultural products, commerce. The builders here are skillful, and the like of their reciters of the Quran are not to be found in al-ʿIraq. Here is perfection in chanting, excellence in reciting, similarly in appearance and reputation. However, the river is constantly flooding it, so that they are all the time backing away from the bank. Kath is dirtier than Ardabll, for here are numerous channels along the streets into which they publicly defecate. They then collect the excrement in pits, to transport it to the arable land in buckets. It is not safe for the stranger to appear abroad until daybreak because of the extent of the excrement; but the natives walk in it and carry it on their feet into the communities. The people have a coarse nature, an ugly disposition; their food is bad, their city vile.
Ghardaman: a fortress stands over the town, a moat filled with water surrounds it, a bowshot in width. The town has two gates.
Wayikhan: a fortress stands over it, a moat surrounds it; at the gates catapults are positioned.
Ardhakhlwa: on the edge of the wilderness, over it a fortress with one gate; close to a mountain.
Nawkafagh: around it flows a channel from the Jayhun River; it is towards the desert, and is fortified; Kardar is bigger and better fortified.
p. 287
p. 2ss
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
236
Mazdakhqan: large, around it twelve thousand villages; an extensive rural district.
Jashira: large; a fortress stands over it.
Sadur: on the bank oftheJayhun, having a fortress and suburbs; the mosque is in the center of the town, in the fortress.
Zardukh: large; with a fortress and suburbs.
Qaryat Baratakin is a large settlement in the wilderness, close to the mountain from which building stone is derived. This town has a flourishing market wherein stands the mosque; the buildings are of an excellent workable clay. The remaining towns are flourishing and fortified; however the biggest of them is Mazdakhqan, which is close to al-Jurjanlyya in area. The town is surrounded by fortification on all sides.
Al-Jurjanlyya: the capital of the province of Khurasan; on the Jayhun River so that the water touches it on all sides; an effort was made every way they could to deflect it by the opposing of piles and boards, but it returned eastward. Then a remarkable thing happened: the structure turned the water towards the wilderness so that it reached to the village ofFaratakin (Baratakin), and it flowed in just one direction; from it the people dug canals for their drinking water, flowing beside the gates of the town. The waters do not enter the town because of the constraints of the canals in which they flow. The town is growing bigger every day. At Bab al-Hujjaj is a fortress which al-Maʾmūm built, on it a door than which there is none more remarkable in all ofKhurasan. His son, ʿAli, built p. 289 another fortress in front of it, outside the gate of which is a sandy area resembling the sandy area at Bukhara; here cattle are sold. The town has altogether four gates.
Nozwar: small, over it a fortress; with a trench. It has iron gates. The high road passes through the town, which has two gates, and a bridge that is raised every night. At the west gate of the city are public baths without compare in the region. The mosque stands in the midst of the markets, and is entirely roofed except for a small portion of it.
Zamakhshar: small, a fortress over it, and with a moat, a prison, and gates braced with iron. The bridges are drawn up every night; the high road passes through the town. The mosque is very fine, beside the market.
Rūzawand: medium in size, fortified, with a ditch; the main road cuts through it, also. The mosque is beside the marketplace. The drinking water is from a spring.
Khiwa: a town situated on the edge of the desert; spacious; on a branch of the river; there is a fine mosque here. Similarly situated are Kardarankhas and Hazarasp, both of which have wooden gates, and a trench.
Jiqarband: like Khiwa, on a river; an abundance of trees and gardens. The market is large and thriving, the mosque beside it. The high road runs through the town.
Jaz: large; with fortress, a wide trench, and bridges. The inner city stretches from one entrance to another, some distance from which the high road runs and beside which stands the mosque.
237
THE REGION OF AL-MASHRIQ
Darghiln is the biggest town in the area after al-Jurjilniyya. It has a beautiful mosque, without compare in the area, magnificently decorated with precious stones. Important, riverine, this town has five hundred celebrated vineyards, and the site of the vineyards stretches for two farsakhs along the shore; it produces raisins.
Jit: large, with extensive rural areas merging with the wilderness. It is a frontier fortified town close to the lands of the Ghuzz [a Turkish tribe], and through here one enters their territory.
Quwildiyiln: a small district on the Jayhūn River, bordering also on al-Saghilniyiln; between these two and Khwilrazm is a number of towns, but we introduce the districts before the towns, as our main intent of this book is to achieve clarity and elucidation rather than sequential arrangement. Not that anyone could reproach us in the matter of arrangement, except perhaps with regard to the districts, and even those we have striven to give in order, so that no p. 290 one would find a chance to criticize us in this matter, unless he is inadvertent. Now, a jurisprudent who had traveled all over Khurasan read our book, and when he came to the districts of Mil warilʾ al-Nahr said he, “Ushrūsana is not between al-Shilsh and Samarqand." Said I to him, “If a man heads out from Samarqand bound for al-Shilsh does he not go by way of Zilmln and Silbilt?" “Certainly," said he. “Well," said I, “both of those are among the towns of Ushrūsana, so my arrangement is correct. If he were to go by way of the capital then he had not taken our map into account."
Quwadiyiln has three towns very well developed, penetrated by a branch of the river, which flows into the Jayhūn. This is a rather mountainous area, yet productive. The biggest town here is Biz, itself not very extensive. The mosque stands in the center of the markets; a fortress stands over the town, with four portals.
Sakaril: close to the mountain, the mosque in midtown.
Awzaj: situated on the bank of the Jayhūn, a populous delightful place.
Būram: some distance away, spacious, in good condition. These towns are all on streams, are quite productive, and prices are low.
Al-Khuttal is an extensive district with many towns, some of which have been associated with Balkh, by some people-but this is an error; and since al-Khuttal is beyond the Jayhūn River [i.e., north] we have with more propriety associated it with Haytal. Moreover, in this book we have treated separately the places that lie on the river from the other districts, so as to deal with them in one frame of reference. Al-Khuttal is more important than al-Saghilniyiln, is more extensive in its layout, having bigger towns, and with more natural wealth. It is on the borders of the region towards al-Sind, and its capital is named Hulbuk. Among its towns are: Marand; Andljilrilgh; Halāward; Lawakand; Karbank; Tamliyilt; Iskandara; Munk; Filrghar; Blk.
Hulbuk is the capital of al-Khuttal, and here is the residence of the P. 291 ruler; smaller than al-Saghaniyiln; the mosque in the center of the town. The
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
238
drinking water is derived from a stream of middling water, and from some other sources.
Addition/version MS. c.
In this country are excellent horses, fruits, and agricultural products; the
remaining cities are developed. In any case Halaward is larger than Hulbuk;
Iskandara is on a mountain, and Munk is the largest of the towns of the district.
Marand: populous, well-developed.
Andljilrāgh: a small town close to the Jayhon River, the drinking water derived from streams that flow into the river.
Halaward: more important than Hulbuk; large; it produces an abundance of fruit, being very fertile.
Iskandara: on a mountain; highly developed.
Munk is the largest town of the district; the other towns are similar to those we have described.
Tirmidh is the most important city on the Jayhon River; it is a fine well-kept town, and one of its quarters, with the markets in it, is paved with burnt brick. Water flows on both sides of the town, and vessels set out for it from every direction. It has a fortress and a quhandiz, the mosque being in the fortress, and the quhandiz outside it. The fortress has one gate, the city, three. There are suburbs to the city also, with fortified posts. Tirmidh is the most important city on the Upper Jayhūn.
Kalif, further west, is on the river. Here is a mosque in the guardhouse named after Dhu al-Qurnayn, and in Haytal, Ribat Dhi al-Kifl faces it across the river. There is not on the Jayhon River a site at which it is possible to build a town on both sides, after the manner of Baghdad. W:lsit is different from Kalif in that here the river is controlled and so does not have floods and deposits ofsand.
Zamm: a large town on the bank of the river; the mosque in the midst of the markets, which are covered. The drinking water is derived from the Jayhon River, and water is brought during harvesting time into the middle of the town.
Nawidah: a small town on the Haytal side of the river; the mosque is in the middle of the town.
Firabr: a town on the Haytal side, about a farsakh distant from the river; a few villages around it. The taxes are low, the grapes excellent, water scarce. There is a quhandiz here, still in use, with excellent guardhouses. The mosque stands at the gate of the town toward Bukhara. The Musalla is outside the gate; and here is a hospice built by Nasr bin Ahmad with accommodations for the wayfarers.
Amul is developed, and all the towns of this region are developed. It abounds in agricultural produce, and is situated about a farsakh from the river, on the road to Khurasan. Here are many villages, taxes are high, water plentiful. The p. 292 villages are in good condition though it is on the edge of the desert; the markets
239
THE REGION OF AL-MASHRIQ
are shaded. The area is a source ofthe finest grapes. Its mosque is on a small hill; the wells are close to the surface.
An Account of the Crossing Points and of the Distributaries of the River (Jayhan)
This river [Jayhon; Oxus; Amu Daryil] has several crossing points with which we are well acquainted; after inspecting and researching we identify twenty-five, apart from those of Khwilrazm. The first of these from the side of al-Khuttal is Khuttaliln; then Mila; then Awzaj at the border of Quwildiyiln; then al-Kodil; then Tirmidh; then another below that, then another, then another; then Killif; then Khilrizmiyiln; then Bukhilriyiln; then Bunkilh Abi Wahab; then Bilbakar (?) (Tubakilr?); then Karkoh, these latter two settlements being on opposite sides of the river; then al-Ribilt, and some close to here; then Khwilriln; then Shir; then Nawldah, where the people of Samarqand cross; then Farhona; then Barmildwil, which is a village belonging to the Bedouin; then another; then the main road of Khurasan; then Firabr and Amul; then Sakilwil; then Milhlkbariln. Then you meet the crossing points of Khwilrazm-Darghiln and Jiqarwand; then another; then Hazilrasp; then Kilth; then the remaining crossing points until the lake is reached, among them those of al-Jurjiln.
As for the effluents (canals) from the river, most of them are in Khwilrazm. One of them, the Karlh, flows for fivefarsakhs; another, the Hazilrasp, continues to widen until it has gone about the distance of a post stage; then beyond that it is not really confined to a channel until it has gone about afarsakh further. This canal irrigates the villages out towards the wilderness. Branching off, also is Nahr Kardariin-Khss, bigger than the Nahr Haazilrassp, between the two a distance oftwo farsakhs. Next is Nahr Khlwah, also of considerable dimension, so that vessels ply on it. Next is Nahr Madril over which vessels ply also; about half afarsakh from Nahr Khlwah. There is a like distance between Nahr Madril; and Nahr Wadilk.
Below the capital, and parallel to the main stream is Nahr Bowwah, and the waters from the two directions meet at the village of Andarastiln. Vessels can travel on this to al-Jurjilniyya; then the barrier we have mentioned prevents further passage. From where the waters meet to the barrier is the distance of a post stage. Nahr Kurdar starts from below the capital about four farsakhs, from four points close to each other, eventually becoming one stream.
Branching off from the Jayhon River, also, are streams that irrigate the rural district of Amul. As for Firabr and the other towns which are on their banks, mention ofthem would merely lengthen the book. Moreover, we have not shown these streams on our map, there being so many of them.
p. 293
The Territory ofthe KHurāsān side ofthe River
You should know that this region has excellences pertaining to this side of it, in
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
240
most of which the side of Haytal shares. However, since this side was delimited first, was introduced to Islam first, and is nearer to the regions of the Arabs, it has been mentioned and known by its nisba [adjectival ending in “I," e.g. “Khurasanl"].
It is told of Ibn Qutayba that he said, “[The people of] Khurasan are the people of the ‘Call,' and the supporters of the state." When God brought Islam to them, they became Muslims with the greatest eagerness of all people, and were the quickest to do so, by the grace of God on them. They adopted Islam voluntarily and in multitudes, and made a lasting peace [with the Muslims] on behalf of their country. Hence their land taxes were light and their calamities few; nor was it necessary to take them into captivity. No blood was shed among them, despite their own capacity for fighting, their great numbers, and the strength of their power. And when God-—ay He be praised—saw the conduct of the Umayyads, with their tyrannies and provocations against the family of His Prophepon whom be peace-He sent against the Umayyads armies from the area of Khurasan which He assembled from its provinces and put together from its districts. And they marched against them like the last darkness of the night. And what is expected from them when the Mahdi [Muslim messianic guide to appear before the last day] comes is more than that, for they are the people of the state, and of victory; and supporters of the truth when it appears.
It is reported that Muhammad bin ʿAbd Allah said to his missioners: “The majority in al-Kūfa are Shl^, following ʿAll; in al-Basra, they are ʿUthmanids, observing abstention [from conflict of Sunni and Shl^]; while in al-Jazlra there are true Harūrites, Bedouins like heathens, and Muslims following the manners of Christians. Then there are the people of al-Shlim (Syria), and they know only Mu^wiya, and obedience to the Ummayads, with deeply seated enmity and profound ignorance. As for the people of Makka and al-Madlna, Abo Bakr and ʿUmar gained ascendancy over them.
“But look at the people of Khurasan! There, the numbers are great, perseverance is clear. There are the peaceful breasts, the hearts free of hatred. These people are not split up into sects nor divided into creeds. No vice degrades them. Rather they have an army ofpeople with bodies and forms broadshouldered, broadbacked; their heads, and beards, and moustaches, and voices formidable. Their language is splendid, and from their mouths comes opposition to any wrong. In sum, I am indeed optimistic about the people of al-Mashriq, of the place of the rising of the lamp of the world, the light of mankind.
“And when God had put affairs in order, He put them in charge, with their successors, with a gentle rule, over the most capable, the most obedient to God, those with the finest morality among His subjects. He graced them with perfection, for they know not the vile."
I read in a book in the library ofʿAdhud al-Dawla that Khurasan, in salubrity of air, goodness of water, healthiness of soil, perfection of fruit, skill of artisanship, in perfection of disposition, tallness of physique, beauty of countenance; in the
p. 294
241
THE REGION OF AL-MASHRIQ
swiftness ofboats, the excellence ofweapons; in its trade, science, probity, law, knowledge,-Khurasiln in all these is a shield against the Turks, who are the most powerful enemies, the most stubborn, and the most patient of their hardships, with the least interest in enjoying an easeful life.
Moreover, the people ofKhurilsiln are the most devoted to the law, the most steadfast in holding on to the truth. The Prophet-God's peace and blessings be upon him-said: “They will enable you to become victorious in the future, as followers of the faith, even as you enforced it on them in the past." By this he means that they will enable you to gain victory by the sword, in conformity with the religion of God; and the verification of this is to be found in the era of Abo Muslim.
You should know that the territory on this side of the river is indeed Khurilsiln, and it is the more important of the two sides, since, [in comparison with Haytal], the larger metropolis is here, its people are more elegant, wiser, and more knowing about good and evil. They are, moreover, closer to the regions and the customs of the Arabs; their capital is more pleasant and better, and they have least cold in the weather, and in the disposition of the people. They are more honourable, have more righteous and intelligent people, and profound knowledge, and remarkable mental retention of the &rān; they have wealth aplenty, and rightmindedness.
In Khurilsiln is Marw, on which the world is founded, and Balkh, which is p. 295 its pinnacle. Here also is NaysilbOr, and do not forget the spaciousness of the area, the importance of its villages. However, vice has spread here, and the land tax is collected twice a year, so the people of the hamlets are in distress.
This is the map of it. [Map XII]
We have divided KhurSsiln into nine districts and eight sections; and we have arranged them in this chapter according to their size, and according to the portrayal of their boundaries. The first of them from beside the Jayhun River is Balkh, but in extent Naysilbur is larger. Of the sections the greatest in extent is Bushanj; then Bildhghls; then Gharjistiln; then Marw al-Rodh; then Tukhllristiln; then Bllmiylln; then Kanj Rustilq; then Asfuzilr. We have considered Tos, and its two sister towns, storehouses ofNaysilbOr. Moreover we have considered Sarakhs as one of the places separate from the districts, because there is a problem here.
Balkh—this is also the name of the capital. Among its towns are Ushforqiln, p. 296 Salim, KarkuJilh, Madhr, BarwilZ. Among its sections are Tukhilristiln, this being also the name of the capital; and some of its towns are: Walwlllij, al-Taliqlln, Khulm, Gharbank, Siminjlln, Iskalkand, Rob, Baghliln al-Suflil, Baghliln al-ʿUlyil, Asklmasht, Rilwan, Arhan, Andarilb, Khast, Saril-ʿAsim. Al-Bilmiylln has towns Basghurfand, Sakilwand (Saqilwand), Lakhrilb. Balkh also has rural areas Badhakhshiln, Banjahlr, Jllrbilyah, Barwiln. All these are important towns and extensive divisions.
Ghaznin is an important district, and this is also the name of the capital. Among its towns are: Kardls, Sakllwand (Saqilwand), Nawah, Bardan, Damrilkhi,
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
242
jtu.٦ء'م;:كم■ -i JJ-Ji A ١
؛ ؛ ر	ا
r ٠ءه٠ ٠ لح٠ن	
Map XII: Khurasan (see p. 416).
From MS. Sprenger 5-Ahlwardt 6034 by kind permission of the Staatsbibliothek Preussischer Kulturbesitz, Berlin, Orientabteilung.
243
THE REGION OF AL-MASHRIQ
Hashsh Bllrah, Farmul, Sarhon, Lajrll, Khwllst (-Ghurllb), Zllwah, Kllwil, Kabul, Lamghlln, Budan, Lahilkar. The section ofWlllishtlln has six towns with mosques: Abshln (Afshln), Asbldajah, Mastank, Shlll, Sakira, Siwah, and eleven hundred villages. The district has two thousand two hundred villages.
Bust-this is also the name of the capital; among its towns are: Jlllaqlln, Blln, Qarma, BOzlld, Ardh (Balad) Dllwar, Sarwistlln, Qaryat al-Jawz, Rakhod, Bakrllwlldh, Banjawlly, Kish, Rodhlln, Safanjllwi, Talqlln (Tlllaqlln); and it has one thousand one hundred villages. Some of these towns are associated with Sijistlln, but this is an error, and few make the distinction that we do. Abo Zayd attributed Ghaznin and Bust to Sijistlln; some people make both of them one district, naming it Kllbulistlln.
Sijistlln is a district with continuous development, though the houses are separated from one another, there being few cities in the area; it has, however, many villages and is a source of date palms and snakes. The capital is Zaranj, and among the towns are: Kuwayn, Zanbilk, Farah, Darhind, Qamln, Kawllrabwlldh, Bllranwlldh, Kizah, Sinj, Bllb al-Tacam, Karwlldikan, Nih, al-Tllq.
Harllt is also the name of the capital; among its towns are: Karilkh, Awbah, Mlllin, Khaysllr, Astarabylln, Mllrllblldh. Of its sections Bushanj has four towns: Kharkard, Farkard (Faljard), Kosoy, Karah. Blldhghis has eight towns: Dihistlln, Koghanllblldh, Kofll, Busht, Jadhllw.a, Kllbrun, Klllwon, Jabal al-Fidhdha. Kanj is a rural area, with three towns: Baban, Klf, Baghshur. In Asfuzllr are four towns: Kuwllshlln, Kuwllrlln, Kilshk, Adraskar.
Jozjlln(lln) is not an old district, being only annexed to the sections ofBalkh; yet today it is one of the chief cities, and a district of the greatest importance, its ruler being a person of influence. There are not many towns here, because ofthe fewness of people; and they are a people of openhandedness, religion, knowledge, and understanding. The capital is al-Yahodiyya, and among the towns are: Anbllr, BarzOr, Faryab, Kalan, Shaborqan (Ushforqan).
Marw al-Shahijan is an ancient district, Dhu al-Qarnayn (Alexander the Great) having established it. It is recounted of Ibn ʿAbbas-and may God be merciful to them both-that he said, “What a wonderful city is Marw! Dhu al-Qarnayn built it, and al-ʿUzayr prayed there." Its streams flow into the pool from which there is no exit; however, an angel stands over it with drawn sword to ward off evil. According to Qatlldll, in the words of God-may He be exalted-“warn the mother city and those who dwell around her"; (Qu^ūn, silra 6, v.92), said he, the mother city in al-Hijllz is Makka, and in Khurllslln it is Marw.
Moreover, he said that when Tahmorath [a mythical king] began to build the quhandiz of the capital he set up a market which had everything one would need. And so it was that if a man would stay there in the evening when he was given his wages he would buy there the food and provisions and sustenance for his family, thus the dirham would return to the market. When the market was empty they would count the money, and behold it would amount to a thousand dirhams. It is a delightfully situated district, except that water is scarce, though
p. 297
p. 298
P. 299
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
244
the course of the river is constantly breaking out. The place where the water is most scarce is near the country domains of the ruler, and formerly they would not allow a ruler to buy a hamlet there. I heard some of them say, “A woman ejected al-Maʾmun from our town." “How?" said I. Said my informant, “She came to him and said, cyou destroyed Marw, and Marw will not permit anyone to own its hamlets except the people.' So al-Maʾmūn ordered a retreat from the town.''
Marw is also the name of the capital, and it is said that it was called Marw al-Shahijan only because “al-shah" means “the king," and “al-jan" means “the spirit." Here is an abundance of dates and raisins; and the baths are very fine. The capital has the same name; and among the towns are: Kharaq, Hurmuzfarrah, Bashan, Sanjan, Sawsqan, Sahba, Klrank, Sink ʿAbbadl, Dandanaqan. Its sections are: Marw al-Rūd.h, and its towns al-Talaqan, Qasr Ahnaf, Hanlna (?), Lawkar.
As for Naysabur, people have disagreed about one of its names, Iran-shahr. Some consider this to be the name of the entire district together with Jabulistan, including it in Sijistan and the area around it. Some have applied the name to this district; and some have applied it to the capital only. This last we accept, that the capital is Iranshahr, by consensus; there is no need to prove this, since proof is incumbent only on anyone who asserts anything above and beyond this. The district is an extensive one with important rural areas, hamlets, and canals. It is said that Abo Bakr al-ʿAbadawl said, “I compared the waters of the Tigris with the waters of Naysabūr, and they were both equal.'' The air is healthy here, you see no leper, and anyone here who consistently eats the fat of meat, goes to the baths, uses oil of violets, need not concern himselfabout the healthiness of the air.
It is told concerning Hammawlh that someone said to him, “If only you had established a hospital in Naysabflr!" Said he, “My treasury is not rich enough for that." Said they, “How is that, seeing that you are commander ofthe army.'' Said he, “Because it needs to draw a wall around the entire city," meaning, by that, that all the people were in need of a hospital, because of their frivolity and lightheadedness.
The name of their capital is Iranshahr; associated with it are four secondary metropolitan cities, twelve rural districts, three exporting towns, a castle, and an administrative seat. The secondary metropolitan centers are: al-Shamat, Rlwand, Mazul, Bushtafrūsh. The rural districts are: Busht, Bayhaq, Kuwayn, Jajarm, IsfaraʾIn, Ustuwa, Asfand, Jam, Bakharz, Khwaf, Zawah, Rukhkhu. The administrative seat is Zūzan; the town with castle is Būzjan; the exporting towns are Tūs, Nasa, and Ablward. There are, in these rural districts we have mentioned, apart from the exporting towns, six thousand villages, like ʿAmawas; and there are two thousand one hundred mosques.
The capital of Quhistan is Qayin; its towns are: Tun, Junabid, Tabas al-ʿUnnāb, al-Raqqa, Khiir, Khwast, Kurl, Tabas al-Tamr.
p. 300
p. 301
Addition/version MS. c.
As for Qāhistiln, it is quite extensive, measuring probably eighty farsakhs by
245
THE REGION OF AL-MASHRIQ
eighty, though the greater part of it consists of mountains and desert areas,
- inhospitable and treeless. Its capital is Qāyin, and among its cities are Ton, Tabas al-ʿUnnilb, Tabas al-Tamr, Kurl, Khor, Khawst, Yunilbidh (Binilbidh), al-Raqqa. Now, suppose someone says, “indeed whatever you have said is correct, and your classificatory presentation is perfect. However, you have added to Naysilbor three important districts, then you were not satisfied until you made them its granaries; so you are at variance with the customary knowledge which is reliable, and the basic consideration to which one must return.” It should be said to him in reply, “you should know that NaysilbOr is the most important area of al-Mashriq (the Orient), and is the parallel of Ifrlqiya in al-Maghrlb (the Occident), and you have seen what it has by way of towns and areas the attribution ofwhich is undisputed. And we have agreed that Balkh and Harilt are primate cities linked with NaysilbOr; we have, too, represented it as having districts more important than Tos and its two sisters-for it is no surprise that we consider that Tus does not stand entirely on its own so as to bo considered a district, so it is necessary that it be added to a district; and there is no district more entitled to it than this one, from many aspects and reasons which are obvious. Hence, since the matter is so, and was not considered, except in the name when we called the district a granary, as far as Nasil and Ablward are concerned, they are both merely two unimportant districts without cities, and we have added them both to the most celebrated administrative district, and capital of the region, so that the administrative districts would be associated with one another in a coherent way, and the analogy extend so as to correspond with Ifrlqiya.”
As for Balkh, we shall begin to describe it as Abu al-Qasim al-ʿAkkl described it, considering that it was his city. Said he, “Balkh in the nature of its people, is beautiful and brave; superlative in character, intelligence, excellence of opinion, and height of capacity; in the grandeur ofsociety, eagerness to administer lawful judgments, readiness to sacrifice for each other in time of need; in the beauty of the situation of the di strict, and its extensiveness; in the evenness of the conditions of its population; in the lowness of prices there. There is, moreover, the abundance of greenery, with the passage of streams through it; the envelopment by trees of its places of business and residences; its proximity to mountains and valleys. Its civilized facilities are like those of Damascus in al-Shilm (Syria). The credit for building Baghdad goes to the people of Khurasan, because it was built for them. Then look at the magnificence ofBalkh, the excellence of its situation, the width of its roads, the splendour of its streets, the multitudes of its rivers; the denseness of its woods, the purity of its water, the radiance of its palaces, the walls of its inner city, its Friday mosque. See the skillfulness of its artisanship, the importance of its location,-there is no place in the regions of the Persians to compare with it for beauty and wealth. From its yield a huge sum is taken every year for the treasury ofthe ruler, in excess of what is needed."
Balkh is situated on a plain, and from it to the closest mountains is four farsakhs. A wall surrounds it and there are suburbs. It is said that its name in the Persian books is “Balkh the brilliant."
p. 302
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
246
Addition/version MS. c.
Balkh is an attractive metropolis, prosperous, agreeable; it is the garden of Khurasan. Among the countries it may be compared to Tahart, and matches Damascus of Syria. Streams cut through its streets, gardens and trees encircle it; its inhabitants have learning, renown, and spaciousness. It is the granary of ٥/-fiqh [jurisprudence in Islam], the source of chivalry, the place of generosity, the abode of happiness, and of a population of refinement. Its houses are spacious, its markets beautiful, its fruits remarkable, its products low in price, its waters wholesomely light. Here are leading principalities, great Imams, a great number of all different kinds of things, profitable articles of commerce, wealth abundant. In the regions of the non-Arabs there is no mosque to equal theirs; in the Orient, no territory to resemble theirs; it is the emporium of al-Sind, the glory of its side of the region. However, it is a boring place, far from the main roads; the routes thither are difficult, its riots are brutal, vices there are widespread. In area it is close to Bukhara, saving that their houses are spacious, on the style of the houses of al-Dandanaqan; the walls are adorned with exterior decorations made of gypsum. The mosque stands in the midst of the markets, and one descends to it by steps: it is well-frequented, highly decorated with filigree of wood. The town is situated in the lowland, about one half of a stage from the mountains; it has an inner city, well developed, in which stands the mosque, also developed suburbs: it has seven gates-Bib Nawbahlr, Bib Rahba, Bib al-Hadld, Bib al-Hinduwln, Bib al-Yahnd, Bib Shast, Bib Yahyl. There is a considerable stream here, a moat surrounds the inner city; all the buildings are of clay.... Al-Tayiqln is the largest city of Tukharistan, stands close to the mountains, and has a stream, and gardens; it somewhat resembles Zabld, and all the other towns are lesser than it-but you may say what you wish about the lowness of the prices of the agricultural products there! The remaining towns of Balkh, all of them, are good. Badhakhshln is a well-developed city with an extensive rural district; it is fertile, has vineyards and streams, and some mines are there. Banjahlr is situated in the mountains, has a stream and gardens, but no cultivated fields worth mention. Jlrblya resembles Sarakhs, or is somewhat larger; it is situated in the mountains, unfortified; has a large stream, but no gardens, rather, fruits are carried thither. The remaining towns are situated amidst streams, trees, and gardens.
Khulm is the town of the Azd tribe. Small, yet its villages, rural district, and farms are many; the air is healthy, the breezes frequent.
Siminjan: bigger than Khulm; has one mosque. Here are fruits, valleys, hunting, cattle, also people of the Tamlm tribe.
Andaraba lies in forested valleys, and here are well-frequented markets. Khast: delightful, wooded, fertile; there are Bedouin here.
Al-Taliqan has a large market. Two streams, branches of the Jayhun River, the Khuttalab and the Barab, flow through it. It is an exceedingly delightful and fertile place.
Iskalkand: small, yet delightful, yielding much agricultural produce.
p. 303
247
THE REGION OF AL-MASHRIQ
Baghllln: there are two, the Lower and the Upper, and they are both among the gardens of Khurllslln. The mosque is in the Lower; the Upp'er is a large village in a wooded valley.
Shiylln: a town in the rural area of Asklmasht. Here is a remarkable spring, beside which stands the mosque of Qutayba bin Muslim.
Banjahlr, that is Jabal al-Fidhdha (the mountain of silver); here the dirhams are plentiful, rarely do you find debased or deficient coinage.
Farwan (Barwan): large, on the edge of the district; a well-attended mosque.
Badhakhshan borders on the land of the Turks above Tukharistan. Here is the mine of the gem which resembles the sapphire, there being no other such mine anywhere. It is a first-rate outpost; and here is the remarkable fortress of Zubayda. Here is the source of lapis lazuli and quartz, of the bezoar stone, and asbestos. This latter is something like papyrus, and fire does not burn it. It is placed in oil and lighted, as the wick is lighted, but is not impaired. It may be taken out and thrown into a roaring fire for an hour and it returns to the state it was before. Table mats are woven from it, and when they are soiled and the people wish to clean them, they throw them into the baking oven, and they come out clean. Here also is a material which if taken into a dark room illuminates everything near it.
Al-Bamiylln: an extensive section, with many products. Its capital is small.
Ghaznln, the capital, is not big, though roomy and prosperous. Prices are low, meats plentiful, fruits excellent and abundant. There are important towns here, and the way oflife is good. This is one of the mercantile towns ofKhurllslln, one of the entrepots of al-Sind. Anyone who visits it frequently gains excellent health. Here are neither fleas nor scorpions, but rather a blessed company. However, the cold here is severe and there is much snow. Generally, their buildings are of wood, in which are set what is called ghashak [a small tile of sorts] resembling the tesselation of Egypt. This city is not famous. Its situation and atmosphere are dry, and its water is not pleasing. It is on a plain, and from it to the mountains is the distance ofafarsakh. The town consists of two parts, and the citadel wherein resides the ruler is in the center of the inner city. The mosque is towards the south, and, with some of the markets, is in the city; the remaining markets and the houses are in the suburbs. The city has four portals: Bllb al-Bilmiyiln, Bilb Sanbiln, (?) Bilb Kardan, Bllb al-Sayr. The people are comfortable, well off. A river flows here, but there are no gardens.
Kabul has a populous suburb. The merchants meet in this town. It has a remarkable impregnable quhandiz. This is the land of the finest myrobalan, so prized by the people of India. The remaining towns are similar to those we have described, most ofthem being in the direction of al-Sind, according to what we have been told.
Bust is an important capital. The people are religious, manly, comfortable, well off, in an area of fertility. They are people of honour and elegance, acquainted
p. 304
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
248
with the Islamic traditions, and knowledgeable. Bust is situated between two rivers, and it is the community of the two fruits [of this world and the next]. The air is gentle, the towns delightful, the villages many, dates abundant, grapes aplenty; here also is the lotus tree, and sweet basil. I have heard Abu Mansur, a jurist of Sijistan, say, “I have not seen a town so small in size that is more fertile, has more fruit, and blessings, than Bust." However, it is a pestilential place, outlying, of small area. It has a well-developed inner city, wherein stands the mosque; there are suburbs wherein are the markets. The drinking water is derived from the Hlrmld (Hilmand) River, and from another river named Khardarūy, which meet a farsakh away. Over the Hlrmld is a bridge of boats close to the place where the two rivers meet.
Half a farsakh away, in the direction of Ghaznln, is a small city called p. JOS al-ʿAskar [the army]; the ruler lives here. Banjawāy is close to the main road, fortified, with a handsome mosque; drinking water from a stream.
Bakrawadh: a large town; the mosque stands in the market; drinking water from a stream.
D:twar: large, pleasant, at the border of al-Ghūr [Ghūristan]. It is an important frontier post with a well-organized garrison. From there to the border of al-Ghūr is one post stage. Some attribute this district to Sijistan, those of the school of Abu Zayd al-Balkhl, and very few separate its towns from Sijistan. Our opinion herein is correct, if God-may He be exalted-so wills.
Zaranj is the capital of Sijistan: it has a sturdy fortress, and is well built. There are snakes here. The people are clever, capable, intelligent, keenminded, having a knowledge of jurisprudence, good memory, subtlety, and brilliancy; they are possessed of polite learning, eloquence, skill, engineering, wisdom, being also people of commerce. There is good living here, lowness of prices, fruits. It is the Basra of Khurasan, and you will not see a more elegant people in embellishments and building in the region. There is a remarkable fortress here, surrounded by a trench in which springs flow and into which the overflow ofthe canals runs. Here the food is clean, here are many elders, commerce is profitable, water abundant. However, snakes are abundant, the heat is oppressive; the date grown here is the daql; disorder is rife, there is constant turbulence among the people, with fanaticism between the two factions plain to be seen; you see those who are killed, and those who are fugitive. Everyone is differentiated there by a nickname; the children of fornication are there in swarms; they wear Caqūrib (curls) but they themselves are Caqūrib (scorpions). They slander one another in poems. In disposition they are disagreeable and cold; they wear their turbans folded as do the Kharijites, and most of them slander both in-laws of the Prophet. Their houses are narrow, the soil stinking, the community frightful-I do not wish to see anything like it. There is an inner city, which has a fortress and a moat; herein is the mosque with the jail opposite to it. The mosque is marvelously constructed, having two minarets, the old one, and another of brass built by Yaʿqūb ibn al-Layth. There is a fortified castle here also. The town is on
249
THE REGION OF AL-MASHRIQ
p. 306 a plain, has many gates and roads; half of it was built by Ardashlr, and half by Khusraw.
al-Taq: small; abundant dates; with an extensive rural district.
Kuwayn has a strong large fortress; no pulpit is here, as they are Kharijites; similarly Zanbūk, and Fofah.
Farah has two sectionstene inhabited by the Kharijites, one by the Sunni.
Darhind: large, close to the mountain; buildings are of stone, and there is a stream. All these towns except al-Taq-for it is towards Harāt-are in the direction of Bust.
Qarnln has a fortress. From here came Banu al-Layth al-Saffarun (the brass founders), who went out and conquered Fars and Khūzistll.n. It has a mosque, suburbs, a stream; it is small.
Bll.ranwll.dh has a fortress. A mosque is here, and no Kharijites. The area produces grain.
Sinj: close to the mountain; a mosque; the buildings are of stone.
Bll.b al-Taʿam is an extensive section with important towns such as: Sūskan, Sakukas, Malkll.n, Karsuwll.d, Barank, Adūras, Kotan, Diyarud, Diyll.r; and it has other central towns. We have said that Sijistll.n is varied in its development as if it were one rural area, with few towns.
Wararank is an armed outpost against the Ghūr; here are guards and watchers and horses consecrated to the holy strife, and tools and equipment are brought there from all over.
As for the towns towards Fars-there is Karwll.dikan, with a mosque; the buildings are of clay, the drinking water derived from the stream. It is not fortified. The mosque is in the centre of the town. The name of the rural district is Hūrsuna. Nih has a fortress, a mosque. The buildings are of clay, and most of the drinking water is from canals.
These four districts are in one line to the left [of the Jayhūn River], which is the west; at the beginning of the second zone from the side of the Jayhūn River is soft sand, as far as Marw, and Jozjll.n(ll.n) is included in this zone. We shall start from Harlit, in accordance with our arrangement.
Harll.t is an important capital, the garden of this side of the province. It p. 307 produces excellent grapes, superb fruits. It is a populous, well-developed area, with arable land, and continuous development; the villages are important. The people here have refinement, eloquence, charm, and knowledge. Various kinds ofconfections come from here, and the cloth made here is taken into regions near and remote. It is a fine, fortified place. However, its people are riotous, murder is a custom with them. Their preachers have no knowledge of the law, and no veneration; their language is vile, their vice disgraceful. Their bread does not satisfy, their turmoil does not cease. The inner city is well developed; there is a quhandiz, and in the suburbs a fortress. The gates of the suburbs face the gates of the inner city, and they correspond with the old names—Bab Ziyll.d towards Naysabūr; Bab Flroz; Bll.b Sarll.y [palace gate] towards Balkh; and Bll.b Khushk
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
250
towards the Ghur area. The mosque is in the middle of the inner city among the markets; it is well attended. There is a remarkable stone bridge here. It is a populous district.
Karukh: the biggest town of the district; well watered, and with gardens.
Awfah (Awbah): small; the mosque is in Mahalla Sabldan; the buildings are of clay. Situated between two mountains, the width of its rural district is twenty farsakhs. The whole area occupied by gardens one beside the other, with flowing streams and populous villages.
Malin: like Awfah; has gardens and water. The buildings are of clay.
Khaysar: a medium sized town; trees and water are in short supply; smaller than Malin.
Astarabyan has flowing water and few gardens; most of it consists of farms; it is situated in the mountains.
Marabadh: smaller than Malin; there are many gardens, water is abundant; fertile, pleasant.
Bushanj is the most important section of Harat, and is well-known in the region. However, we will be censured if we attribute it to Harat, seeing that its ruler sometimes is a different one from that of Harat; and it is said that its name is mentioned ahead of that of Harat in the official registers, what is said about it being like what is said about Tus. However, our guide whom we have followed is Abu Zayd, who was the most knowledgeable about the bureaucracy of Khurasan, knowing the details of its areas better than anyone else.
Addition/version MS. c.
[He was the most learned in the bureaucracy of] the Orient, the division of its
territories, and I noticed that he added it with its sister cities to Harat; but if the
addition of it to Harat is correct, then our analogy is consistent with regard to
the other districts of the realm of al-Islam.
It is about half the size of Harat, situated on level ground, from the town to the mountain being a distance of about two farsakhs. It has an abundance of water, lots of trees, and timber is exported from here to the other sections. It has a fortress, a moat, and three gates-Bab ʿAll; Bab Harat; and Bab Quhistan.
The next biggest town is Kusuy, about one third the size of Bushanj; gardens; the buildings are of clay.
Farkard (Faljard) has not many gardens; however the people are prosperous, have freely grazing livestock; running water.
Kharkard has streams, many gardens, but is small.
Badhghīs-the largest of its towns is Dihistan, about half the size of Bushanj. The buildings are of clay; on a mountain, there is a deficiency of water. No gardens; and the farms are watered solely by rain; also tunnels underground. The residence of the ruler is in Kughanabadh; Dihistan is more populous.
Jabal al-Fidhdha: on a mountain; its mines are in disuse.
p. 308
251
THE REGION OF AL-MASHRIQ
Kūfa is in the steppe; it has no gardens or running water, its farms watered by rain alone; similarly Kūghanabadh, Jadhawa, Kalwon, Kabrūn,-these have neither gardens nor running water. The inhabitants derive their drinking water from rain and from wells; they grow vegetables and grain. These towns are on the road to Sarakhs.
Kanj Rustaq-its largest towns are: Baban, where the ruler resides, larger than Būshanj; Baghshūr, about the size of Būshanj in area; Klf is about half that size, has an abundance of running water, gardens and many vineyards; the buildings of clay. Baghshūr is in the steppe, and the farms are watered by rain only, the drinking water is from wells. The land here is healthy, the climate temperate, the water light. It is on the road to Marw al-Rūdh.
Asfuzar-the largest of its towns is Kuwashan; here are streams, and many gardens, vineyards; the buildings are of clay. The remaining towns are smaller p. 309 than it, all of them surrounded with trees, and having streams and parks.
Harat has important areas and attractive localities, the mention of which would merely lengthen the book.
Addition/version MS. c.
You should know that Abo Hanlfa, the foremost Imam, and the jurisprudent of the community of the faithful, despite his pre-eminence and his knowledge of the law, was perplexed by three questions on which he had scruples, and of the responsibility for which he washed his hands. And there was one question on which he expressed misgivings, speaking slightingly ofit and with circumspection, in order that God-may He be exalted-wouiu let His creatures know that humans are feeble, and that above every possessor ofknowledge is an Omniscient One. Now we, for our part, have classified this realm in detail, as you see, and God-glorious is His name-has disclosed to us, in this science, what He has not disclosed to any other than ourselves. He has, moreover, provided for us the means whereby we arrived at the furthermost extremities, and traveled over the lands; and He has put in order for us that knowledge for which we strove, so that we are able to gather and arrange it. We extended the analogy and applied it, with every discretion, carrying it from one stage to the next; however, we also were perplexed in the matter of three districts, and had our doubts in respect to one. As for those over which we were perplexed, Gharj alShllr, and Marw alRodh, and Sarakhs, we wavered and had our doubts, and excused ourselves in those sections; so we limited ourselves in our description ofthem, and did not add them to a metropolis, nor did we diverge from our analogy on their account.
As for the doubtful one, that is Isfahan, we propound our position on it.
Gharj al-Shar — Gharj" means “the mountains," and “al-Shar" means “the king," so its meaning is “Mountains of the King;" the people call it Gharjistan, and to the present its kings are addressed by the title “al-Shar." It is an extensive section with many villages, and has ten mosques. The most important is Abshln, wherein is the residence of the rulers, and their palaces are there. It has a fine mosque, and guardhouses; a river is here called the River of Marw al-Rodh.
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
252
Shūrmln is also among the cities of this area; and these two are close in size.
Ballkan also is among the towns here, situated in the mountains. Approaching this province are roads with iron gates, and it is not possible for p. 310 anyone to enter except with permission. There is true justice here, respect and consideration are natural and instinctive; all things else done according to the custom of the two ʿUmars [Abu Bakr and ʿUmar bin al-Khattab]. The manners here delight the eye, there are no oppressive rulers, nor do they create anything to change the facts. What is taken from the rich among them is given to the poor. Anyone who commits a crime is either pardoned or executed. Along with that, they are sound, virtuous people of the first clay. The Messenger of God-God’s peace and blessings be upon him-spoke the truth when he said, “According to what you are, thus will you be ruled." We hesitated in assigning it because of these circumstances, and were not able to attach it to one of these districts around it, since it is itself independent, glorious in its ruler; neither could we make it a district, for this would controvert our rules followed in the case of Būshanj, and other towns like it. If someone should say, “It must be added to Balkh, because it is joined with its section in a certain respect, that is, in the end of the name; for do you not see that they say ‘Gharjistan; just as “Tukharistan," “al-Bamiyan," “Barwan" are said?’ " The answer to that is: “General usage, in our science, is more forceful than what you have said, because it is founded on matters of assurance. For example, God-may He be exalted^allad the earth a carpet; now if a man swore that he would not sit on a carpet, and he were to sit on the earth he would not perjure himself, for this would not be in accord with the general usage."
Marw is known as Marw al-Shahijan; a capital delightful, fine, elegant. It is brilliant, extensive, pleasant; there, foods are delicious, clean; the houses are well-built, tall; and because of their elegance, both sides of the town are like the decorated edges of a garment. Their scholars, of the highest intellect, are honoured. The two mosques are built of baniit [a type of soft marble], without the use of wood and without colonnades. Every night groups of upright people meet in council; the preacher is a jurist, and follows the school of Abū Hanlfa; the schools have a daily allotment of food for each pupil. Their markets are finealo you not see the rows of them winding around the Upper Mosque from p. 311 every side? Here is the renowned region of abundance, here the courtyard of the noble ruler. Do not ask about the baths of Marw, nor of its harisa; nor of its bread, its intellect, its strength, for they are well known. But do ask about their waters, their learning, manly qualities, for they are weak; and about their slyness, and their disorder-for I could write a book about them. The true account is desirable for itself, and I am not one of those who eats his bread by the exercise of his science; but I seek Paradise, and hope for the call to the blessed life. Marw is a notable town but its population is small, for it has gone to ruin except for a few houses; a third of the suburbs are laid waste as if it dated from antiquity.
253
THE REGION OF AL-MASHRIQ
Houses have decayed and the roofs have tumbled down. Vice is evident, their disorder well-known; their earnings are low, altogether insignificant. They are not generous, nor are their cooking pots clean. Their clay has no tenacity; and in summer the heat dries up everything. The bureaus of the land tax and of the police are in the mosque; their river is constantly overflowing its banks. They commonly put the sound ofzāʾ [a letter] before the ya> [a letter] in the [word of] attribution [e.g. Balkhl, Balkhazl]. They are a people of mocking and laziness, as a man of understanding knows.
Addition/version MS. c.
Everyone in his cunning and mockery is subtle. However, it pours forth an abundance of agricultural produce, the pigeons in their flying to the dovecots try to outdistance one another, and excellent bread is readily available.
Marw is on a plain far from the mountains. The old central city is on a hill, in the middle of which is a place of prayer which used to be the Friday mosque formerly; there are many houses around it. At the gate ofthe suburbs are buildings and a small market, and in the suburbs are two mosques: one at the gate of the inner city, the other in the money exchange, and most of its congregation are followers of Abo Hanlfa. This latter mosque, and what is around it was built by Abo Muslim, the governor. The city has clean markets.
Addition/version MS. c.
Abo Muslim had brought it into desuetude because he cursed ʿAll bin Abl Tillib—may God be pleased with himten his pulpit; and he built another mosque amidst the suburbs, so the other was filled with refuse to the time of al-Maʾmon; he ordered its restoration, Ashilb al-Hadlth (adherents to the Traditions) undertook that task, and they appropriated it. However, the call to prayer is uttered here twice.
My own impression is that the people only adorned themselves, and adopted Iraqi habits because of the stopping-off of the khalif there, when the people of the country adopted from his mercenaries and followers the manners of al-ʿIraq-but God knows best. Of all cities, it most resembles al-Ramla in Palestine. The inner city has four gates—Bilb al-Madlna beside the mosque; Bilb Sanjiln in the other direction; Bilb Billln; Bilb Darmashkiln, beside which stood the palace of al-Maʾmon. The quhandiz is in the inner city; it is in ruins and difficult to get through, and may be entered only by the giving of a certain sign. The water channel enters the inner city and flows through all the suburbs. Here are well-tended reservoirs, on which are sluice gates, and canals run through parts of the town.
Klrank is a large town, being on both sides of the river, a bridge between the two parts. Two branches of the main stream, with mills on both of them, cut through the town. The Friday mosque occupies a third of the town: beside it is a hostel, the minaret being between the two.
p. 312
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
254
Sinj: populous; the mosque is on the edge of the market, a stream behind it. A garden is here, beside it a vineyard, belonging to the family of al-Musaffa.
Kharaq-its mosque is outside the market. The drinking water is from a branch of a canal which flows in the direction of the Qjbla of the mosque.
Bashan-its mosque is in the jewelry market. The drinking water is from a branch of the stream.
Dandanaqan: small, fortified, with one gate. The baths and the guardhouse are outside it, as in al-Juhfa, and it is a point in the defenses ofDihistan. The town has a fine situation, with a beautiful Friday mosque, and one place of prayer.
Sarakhs is a large populous well-known city, and if there were an army there we would have made it a district or a section; but I was hesitant about its circumstances, and the matter was problematical for me. I have read in one of the books called The Division ofthe Districts ofKhurasan that Sarakhs, Ablward, and Nasa are one district; but our procedure does not accept this statement, since p. m Nasa and Ablward are two important districts, each one having towns. Hence it is not permissible for us to consider them as provincial towns of Sarakhs, or to consider Sarakhs, either, a provincial town to those two. Al-Baladhurī says, “Khurasan is in four quarters: the first is Iranshahr, which is Naysabur, with Quhistan, Harat, and Tūs; the second quarter is al-Marwan, Sarakhs, Nasa, Abīward, al-Talaqan, and Khwarazm; the third quarter, al-Jūzjan(an), Balkh, and al-Saghaniyan; and the fourth quarter, Ma waraʾ al-Nahr." But this also contravenes our procedure, for our system of reference makes Sarakhs the treasury of Naysabūr. Even so, we have here set aside our model, for it seemed best to us to consider Sarakhs subjoined to Marw, seeing that it is with it in the same area, along with the closeness in customs, language, and distance between them. This is the country of grain and grazing livestock. Abu al-ʿAbbas al-Yazdildl asked me about Jerusalem. Said I, “It is like Sarakhs, except that Jerusalem is clean, beautiful, elegant." Sarakhs has an inner city, in which is the mosque with a small market. Most of the markets are in the suburbs. The drinking water is from wells, from which also is the irrigation of their farms. There is here a stream which flows intermittently.
Addition/version MS. c.
If Sarakhs had a number of towns in the rural districts mentioned, such as Tabari'in and the like of it, we should have divided it into districts, and added to it Marw al-Rodh, and Nasi'i, and Ablward, because it is intermediate to Khuri'isi'in and al-Murabba<a al-Kubri'i, and it is there, moreover, that all of the routes come together. Indeed I have heard Abo Ahmad al-Hishi'iml declare: “Our community is hardly ever at a loss for anything, because the caravans from every direction come to a halt here.” It is not possible for us, either, to include it among the military districts ofMarw, seeing its preciousness and the importance of its institutions, because it is said of it that it seized for its ruler, Abu al-Hasan al-Faqlh, ten thousand small cattle and camels, and that to this he paid no attention, nor did he mention it to his courtiers before they had learned of it
255
THE REGION OF AL-MASHRIQ
otherwise. It is, too, the source of succour for NaysllbOr, and the river harbour of Khurllslln. I have calculated that every week as much grain passes through it as it transported from Egypt to the Red Sea. Now, these considerations bar it from being a citadel or a city-and indeed the territory does not lack either of these-and have made it impossible, in the case of Sarakhs, from one side, and have made it inescapable from another side; thus the matter is problematical, and has become like the question of the hermaphrodite, the difficulty that Abo Hanlfa encountered It is a town ofspacious markets, a stream runs right through it, and here, too, are wells of sweet water. It has an inner city that is somewhat disordered, and having in it the mosque and a number of shops. Suburbs surround the inner city on three sides, and beyond the fourth side is open country; beyond this, again, another city which had gone to ruin and is become a tell. The mosque is spacious and large, the roofed part built on pillars of baked brick; the courtyard is splendid. On one occasion, al-Shaykh Abu al-ʿAbblls al-Yazdlldl asked me with what place Jerusalem might be compared. Said I, it is like Sarakhs, except that Jerusalem is populous, beautiful, and charming. p.314 Marw al-Rodh is an important town with an extensive section; it is properly joined with Gharj al-Shilr, being close to it and having been mapped in it. Do you not know that the postmasters enjoy the favour of al-Shilr (the ruler) and are under his benefit and care.
Addition/version MS. c.
Marw al-Rodh also is just as we have indicated in the maps, being interconnected with Gharj al-Shar, worthy of it, close to it, and planned after it.
Do you see that the postmasters enjoy the favour of al-Shar, and are under his benefit and care? Moreover, it is distant from Marw al-Shllh, so it is not possible that it be added to it; nor is it to be added to Sarakhs, even though it is close to it We have, too, restricted our description of it.
The capital bears the same name. The area has four other mosques. It is about two-thirds the size of Zabld. The river cuts through its edge. It produces much agricultural products. The mosque is in the market, built on wooden pillars; the markets are shaded in the summer. Its towns are: Dizah, a large, fine town which the river cuts through, the mosque being in the market; Qasr Ahnaf-the river flows at its edge also, the mosque being in the market; Hanlna(?) and Lawkar(il) are both well populated and extensive.
With regard to Marw al-Rodh and Sarakhs there are problems and controversy, just as in the case of Gharj al-Shilr, which we shall mention later, and which we shall classify as it should be. We have only brought Sarakhs in relation with Marw because it appeared advisable to us to do so, since Marw is the chief town in the regions of the non-Arabic speaking peoples, and is the more deserving of having the sections associated with it; and the association need not be disputed. And in God is success!
Irilnshahr is the metropolis of this side [of the province] and the capital of NaysilbOr. It is an important town, a noble metropolis; I do not know any in the
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
256
realm oflslam on a par with it. For it combines within it such characteristics and conformity of qualities as extent of area, spaciousness of site; pureness of water, healthiness of air, numerousness of scholars. It is a city of the venerable and the knowledgeable among the Imams. Fruits are plentiful, delicious; meats excellent, cheap. The mode of living is pleasant, favourable; markets are extensive, houses spacious, hamlets superb, gardens delightful. The clay binds. Genius there is subtle, councils brilliant, schools elegant. There is gracefulness, suavity, honourable customs so choice; workmanship, skill, commerce, good expression, industriousness, chivalry, kindness, charity, cherishing of sacred things, friendship, all well known in distant realms, and renowned in the realm of Islam. It is the treasury of the two portions of the Orient, the entrepot for east and west. Its goods are carried to distant places, its cloth has light and radiance, so the people of Egypt and al-Iraq adorn themselves with it. Fruits are carried to it, and people travel to it to seek knowledge, and to trade. The port ofFars, al-Sind, and Kirman, the entrepot of Khwarazm, al-Rayy, and Jurjan. The summer is good, ice is plentiful; winter is cozy, an abundance of grapes. The jurist does not lack refinement, nor is justice insufficient; nor is the day without a council of government. It is a metropolis of which the nobles diminish the leaders [of other places]; its scholars occupy the lofty positions; the [learned] Imams can confuse [even] the scholars. Its quarters are more than those of other cities, and its extent more than other metropoles. Tell me what there is in the realm of Islam like it!
I heard Abu ʿAli al-ʿAlawī say to Abu Saʿld al-Jūrl: “You are an elder of the area; if it were separated from Naysabūr it would need [only] a drum, a flag, and a prince in residence." I was asked about it in Fars and I said, “It has four and forty districts, some of them about half the size of Shiraz, such as al-Hlra, al-JUr, and Manlshak." It is more extensive than al-Fustat, more populous than Baghdad, more complete than al-Basra, more important than al-Qayrawan, cleaner than Ardabīl, more developed than Hamadhan. There is no putridity here, no salt flats, no wearisomeness, no constraint of space. However, in its air is dryness, in its people dissension; in their language flaccidity, in their heads, lightness. There is no friendship, no magnificence, no places of prayer that are clean; streets filthy, hostels decaying, baths dirty, shops horrible, walls badly joined; misfortune has dogged it, and high prices have befallen it. Food and firewood are scarce; the mode of life and taxes are heavy. Dry land, and bare mountains. Their water is under the ground. Their dissension blinds the heart, and their fanaticism tears out the breast. Their muhtasib has no prestige, no rigour, their preacher no diffidence, no charm; nor on the days [of public prayer] is there a congregation in their mosque. Their Imam has no nobility, no refinement; their orator no candour, and no truth. Most of the people do not belong to the two groups [Hanafite and Shafiʿite]; the Shīʿa and the Karramites are both in opposition, hence the lot of the jurists is trouble and disgrace. And if the governor should be removed, then will there really be trouble, for disgrace will overwhelm it from both sides.
p. 315
p. 316
257
THE REGION OF AL-MASHRIQ
The city measures about afarsakh each way. In the center ofthe inner city is a fortress, and around [the city] is a ditch; [the city] has four gates. There is a quhandiz beside it, the course of the ditch separating the two. The quhandiz has two gates, one of them towards the city, the other towards the suburbs. The roads leading to the metropolis exceed fifty in number, the most famous of them being Darb al-Jlq, Darb Khushnan, Darb Dard, Darb Manlshak, Darb al-Qbab, Darb Fars, Darb al-Khurūj, Darb Aswar Karlz; before each ofthese gates stands a bridge that carries across the ditch. The mosque is in the suburbs below the city at the edge of the market, and it has six chambers. The masjid al-minbar [the raised portion of the mosque] was built partly by Abo Muslim, and this portion is on columns of wood; the remainder of it, built by ʿAmr bin al-Layth, is on rounded pillars of baked brick. Three porticoes go around the main hall of the mosque, and in the middle of this is the main building, decorated. The mosque has eleven gates, beside which are columns of variegated marble. The roof has three arches, the walls are decorated, and the roof ends in a point. You should know that it is an important metropolis, even though you do not see there a good market, a handsome hostel. There, whenever any Tom, Dick, or Harry screeches, the crowd follow him with their dreadful fanaticisms, and their behaviour is not at all pleasant.
Al-Shamat is an extensive quarter, having fine villages and many farms. The people there call it “Tak Ab," that is, “whither the water flows," since it is the lowest of the rural districts; all over the capital the water emerges and may be seen. There is no central city, fruit is not abundant, there being only farms.
Rlwand: a splendid, delightful quarter; many vineyards, excellent grapes, fine fruits; a quince is here the like of which is not to be seen. There is a town p. 317 here of the same name, most attractive, cut through by a stream; it has a mosque of baked brick, recently renovated.
Mazul is a delightful quarter with remarkable villages. From here comes the superb ribas currant. The village of Bushtaqan is here, of which ʿAmr bin al-Layth tried to buy a section-it has four sections, with the houses admidst the gardens, and streams cutting through them-but his treasuries were not sufficient, and what he had available was only the revenue of Naysabor, and a thousand loads of goods. I have heard that they told him that in this village were trees, each one worth from ten dinars to ten dirhams, “and we have sold you every one for a dinar.”
Addition/version MS. c .
... but the value of his treasuries was insufficient; and I heard that when he entered into Naysabor he had with him a thousand loads of dirhams. In it were waqfs (endowed lands), their extent about a farsakh square, which the ruler, ʿAmld al-Dawla, had determined to annex to the capital.
Yushtafrūsh (Bushtafrosh) is a quarter with many profitable things, including grapes; in fact in one day, at Bab [gate] al-Jlq, there arrive ten thousand loads of
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
258
grapes. I have heard Abo SaʿJd al-JOrl say that there is a garden here in which is an apricot tree, the daily return of which is a dinar from the beginning to the end of the apricot season. There is no inner city here, but a large village of the same name.
Addition/version MS. c.
The fourth secondary metropolitan centre lies towards the east; here are grapes in abundance: It does not have an inner city, but attached to it is a village bearing the same name; Kharq is bigger than it. I have heard that some of the dignitaries of Naysabor dropped in to visit Abn ʿArūba, in al-Raqqa, and asked him about Naysabflr and its glorious qualities. Said he: “A village is here that is named Qaryat Kharq, from which is derived on every day without exception grapes to the value of a hundred thousand dirhams.”
Busht is the most splendid of the twelve rural districts. It is a large district, having seven mosques. It is said that Abu al-Fadhl al-Balʿaml and Abu al-Fadhl bin Yaʿqob attended the council of al-Amlr al-Saʿld, and al-Balʿaml exaggerated in the praise of Marw. Said Ibn Yaʿqob, “We do not deny the excellence of Marw, for it is, indeed, as you have mentioned. However, Naysabor has twelve rural districts, among them Busht, and the income of three of its towns would equal the income of Marw." They looked into the matter, and lo, the matter was as he said. It is a rural district bringing together fruits, grains, the finest grapes. I have heard that there are olives and abundant figs; and from here the first fruits of the season are brought because the climate is temperate. The name of its chief town is Turthlth. It is a fine populous town, in it a mosque that is not inferior to the mosque of Damascus, being wealthier than it, handsome and well-kept. Beside the mosque is a market newly built, as are all the shops around it. A place of prayer has been added, built ofbaked brick and gypsum; at its door is a superb round water cistern, to which one goes down by stairs. The town is the port of Fars and Isfahan, the storehouse of Khur:ls:ln.
Kundur is smaller, fairly well like what we have just been mentioning, in its development and products. The remaining mosques are in a number of the villages.
Bayhaq is beside this rural district, and resembles it in agricultural products, fertility, and the fineness of the villages. The main road to al-Rayy cuts through it. There are two towns here-Sawzawar (Salzawar) and Khusrojird; they are well-developed, a farsakh between them. A village is here, cut in halves, each half on the main road. Here are splendid villages such as Jazlnān, and others like it. The people are refined, having produced a number of scholars and writers. Much cloth is produced here.
Kuwayn: an extensive rural area, with much produce. Fruits, grains, clothes are produced here. The road to Jurjan runs through it. The people are ashab hadith [followers of Tradition] and are refined. The name of the chief town is Azadhwar, highly developed, populous and quite productive.
p. 318
259
THE REGION OF AL-MASHRIQ
Jajarm: a small splendid rural district. It has a large, fortified town with the same name, and herein is a fine mosque. The district has about seventy villages. It is said that every rural district of the twelve, and every quarter of the area has three hundred sixty villages, with the exception of this one.
Isfara'ln is a valuable rural district. It is a source of excellent grapes, here are farms, and cedars in abundance. The highroad to Jurjan cuts through here. Its chief town, of the same name, is developed, prosperous, not a town in the district more important than it. Here are good markets, and a number of specialties. The people here are also ashiib hadith.
Ustuwa: a large rural district on the highroad to Nasa. In these rural districts there is not one more fertile, or more productive of grain than it; it is the chief source of provisions for Naysabūr. The land is watered by rain only. Much garlic is grown here, and a lot of clothing is produced. The name of its chief town is Khūjan, not very big, behind a mountain, far from the main road. The other rural districts are well developed.
Addition/version MS. c.
Ustuwil is an important town on the main road to Nasil: most of the fruits of the metropolis come from here. It is an area where grains and garlic are raised in abundance, and a source of many supplies; most of the land is watered by rainfall, and fruits here are few. Here are two towns, one of them Khnjan-not very large-in which stands a single market; the second, Dawln, smaller than the other. Asfand is a small town producing little fruit. The main road to Marw cuts through it; it has no inner city. Zilm is a large town, and Bflzjan had been made its city, but we have made it a town. Bilkharz is a district of grains and raisins; much cloth is made here, but the town is not thought much of. Its city, Malin, is populous. Khwilf is a small district, producing much raisins and pomegranates. The name of its chief town is Salnmak. Zilwah is an area such as we have been describing: I do not know any town pertaining to it. Rukhkh, too, is small: the name of its chief town is Blshak. The district of Tns is a granary, important, extensive, and ancient. It is situated among the rural districts of NaysilbOr, and considerable advantage accrues from it. Here are cultivated fields, rain-watered lands, fruits. The area has some particular characteristics, for here are mines, and dignitaries; but it is also the home of robbers, a hotbed of rebellion, mountains surround it, and the roads thither are difficult. Tilbariln is its largest town. ...
Tabaran is the biggest ofthe cities of Tūs; over it stands a fortress. From a distance, it looked to me like Yathrib [Madlna]. There is a busy market here; venerable and distinguished people; there are profitable things and merchants. The mosque is in the markets, and Ibn ʿAbd al-Razzaq embellished it. They have canals close to the surface, and wells. Produce is plentiful, prices are low; here firewood is plentiful; fruit is good. However, it is a filthy place, its outskirts in ruin; it is cold, the baths are bad, and they are the worst of people for trouble and strife.
p. 319
260 THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
Nūqiln is smaller than Tilbariln. The markets surround its mosque. There are people here skilled in moulding earthenware pots, and the like. They are a generous people, but their water is scant.
Junilbid is smaller than Nūqiln; it has seventy villages. The remaining towns are: Ustūrqiln; Jarmaqan (Sarmaqiln); TurOghbadh (Turūghodh); SarkO; p. 320 Rayakiln; Barnūkhkiln.
Addition/version MS. c.
I have heard some of their dignitaries say, during the council meeting of Zarlf bin Ahmad al-Klltib in Nasll, that the people of Tns were ahead in regard to both worlds, for in this world they anticipated in their conversion to Islam the districts of Khurilsiln; as for the next world, God-may He be exalted-says:
“On that day' we shall call all men with their leaders” (Qurʾān, sOra 17, v.71}and ʿAll bin [Mūsā] al-Ridhil was, to his followers, the most excellent of the Imllms among them.
Nasil is an extensive district, delightful and fine: waters abundant, agricultural produce aplenty, trees intertwined. The fruit is good, the mosque elegant; bread is clean, the market paved. It has special qualities and excellences. There is but one doctrinal school there. Prices are always low. Here is jurisprudence, politeness, noble lineage, virtuous quality, power, vigour. It is the rare house that has no garden; here is flowing water, and large villages. Even so, every ignominy is here, for factionalism has ruined it; its villages contain Khwarazmians, who go beyond the meaning of the Quriin, and chant the call to prayer in a singsong; they have diverged from Islilm. Here are ten roads, lost among the trees. There are two towns, Isflnaqiln and Jarmaqiln, and two outposts, Afrilwa and Shilristilna. Afrilwa is an important guardhouse-here are brave men, a number of horses, and weapons. Three fortresses adjoin one another, and around one of them is a ditch; drinking water is from springs in the guardhouse. This is in the wilderness, the provisions are carried to there. They are a quarrelsome lot, and have destroyed community life.
Addition/version MS. c.
Close to it Abu al-Qāsim al-Mikall had built hospices, and endowed them with treasuries and waqfs. He selected, too, a number of villages whither he drew canals from the mountains; his grave is there. The hospice of Shahristan is inferior to the other, and the sands had overwhelmed it berth of these places are fortified, have excellent treasuries, and a number of mosques. p. 321 Ablward to me is more remarkable than Nasil; its market is busier, it is more prosperous, more fertile. The drinking water is from a stream. The mosque stands in the market; its fortress has gone to ruin. Its chief town is Mahana; its guardhouse Kofan.
Addition/version MS. c.
Mahana is a small place, a fortress standing over it; and within it is a mosque
261
THE REGION OF AL-MASHRIQ
that has decayed. Kofan is a caravanserai with a fortress standing over it. It has four gates, and its circuit, irregularly shaped, is said to measure afarsakh. In one corner of it is a hospice in which stands the great mosque; and within the mosque are a cistern and two pools; here too is a channel of water of rather middling quality. Zozan, the center of habitation, is a large city situated about fortyfarsakhs from the capital. It is well developed, and is home to many weavers and makers of felt. Bozjlln, the place of abode of the ruler, is a considerable city; some people assign it to the district ofJitm, and do not mention the abode of the ruler; but what we have said is more correct.
Qayin is the capital ofQuhistan; it is not agreeable or splendid, but small, cramped, lacking irrigation. The language is barbarous, the town dirty, means of subsistence slight. It has, however, a strong fortress, and its name is well-known in CUman. Much cloth is brought from there, and groups of people walk thither. It is the export point of Khurasan, the source of supply of Kirman. The drinking water is from canals. The town has three gates.
Tabas al-Tamr (the date orchards) has a fortress; its market is small, its mosque delightful. Its drinking water is from cisterns to which open canals run. I saw good baths there.
Kurl is three farsakhs away towards the desert. It is smaller than [Tabas al-Tamr] in development.
Al-Raqqa: small, close to the desert; drinking water is from springs.
Tūn: a developed populated place, with many weavers. In both these towns are scholars and eminent people.
Khwast has a fortress, is on the edge of the desert. It is bigger, but has fewer people than Ton. Trees are few: drinking water is from springs.
Tabas al-ʿ٧nnab (the jujube orchards) is called Tabas Maslnan; an abundance of jujubes.
Addition/version MS. c.
Qāyin is a city limited in area and water; it has little surplus or prosperity. Here stands a quhandiz (ancient fortress). The town is protected by a fortress and a moat, and has three gates - Bab Koran, Bab Kalll.wll.j, Bllb Zuqll.q Istaykhlr. The inhabitants derive their drinking water, for the most part, from underground channels. The people here are weavers. Their speech is uncivilized, their attire filthy; there is no generosity, no refinement. The villages here are dispersed, the steppes forbidding. Nevertheless in the area are many provincial towns, and remote districts. Its cities are well known, its reputation great, it is the goal of many. This city and Turthlth are the two river-ports of CUmitn, the two entrepots of Kirmlln, the two treasuries of Khurasan. Ton is smaller than Qāyin; here are many weavers, and workers of wool. Over the town stands a fortress, in the middle of the town stands the mosque. The drinking-water of the inhabitants is from a channel, and this is visible in the mosque. Yunll.bidh has many villages, and extensive gardens. KhOr is a small town, the buildings here of clay; here stands no fortress, no gardens, and its supplies of water are scant. The town
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
262
stands on the edge of the desert. Tabas al-Tamr produces the dates called “Hijazl” [a variety round and soft, somewhat flat to the taste]. A fortress stands over the town, which has a charming mosque. The drinking water here is from channels. Tabas al-CUnnil.b, also called Tabas al-Maslnil.n produces an abundance of jujubes, though of inferior quality. Its fortress had been destroyed. I did not see in Quhistan one permanently flowing stream or a wooded place other than Tabas [al-Tamr]; and wherever I went around there, about the distance of a post stage, it is all villages, and date palms, and water channels. Tabas Maslnil.n also is concealed amidst the jujube trees; and I did not see in the area a quhandiz except in Qāyin, and the mosque stood in it. Al-Raqqa is a small town; Khawst is at the foot of a mountain. This district is extensive but much covered with deserts and mountains; the whole area is cold except for Tabas and the villages. p. 322	A Summary Account of Conditions in this Region
This is a cold region, except for Sijistan, Bust, and Tabas al-Tamr, for their climate is inclined to be hot like that of al-Sham (Syria); the climate of Balkh is like that of al-ʿIrāq; the climate of Marw like that of al-Sham. The cold of Khurasan is less severe than the cold of Haytal. This entire region is generally dry, but the dryness also is not uniform there; and whenever the cold of a place in this region is severe, its heat is severe also. An exception is Samarqand which is fine in the summer, similarly Naysabiir where, however, the cold is less severe than at Samarqand. In this entire region the people sleep on the roofs when the weather is uncomfortably hot.
Someone told me that ʿAbd Allah bin al-Mubarak came to see ʿAbd al-Razzaq in Santaʾ, and enquired of him about the weather in Khurasan. Said he, “We sleep three months in the houses, three months on the porches, three months on the roofs; then we repeat this arrangement." Said [the other], “Look, 0 Khurasanl, in that case you are always on the move; but all my life, I sleep in this one place." It is the same with most of al-Sham, and part of Fars, and part of Kirman. For my part, I lived twenty years in Jerusalem, and I slept in the house. Gharj al-Shar is hot in the summer.
. Here are many rivers and much fruit; no lake except in Khwarazm, a salt p. 323 one; another one in Sijistan, and another in Bukhara-both fresh water. Vessels travel only on the Jayhūn River and Nahr al-Shash.
This is the greatest of the provinces in knowledge and law, and preachers here are highly respected. The people have money aplenty. Many Jews are here, few Christians, some Magians. No lepers are here, they do not know leprosy. The sons of ʿAll-may God be pleased with him-ara held in highest honour, and you see no Hashimite, unless he be a stranger.
As for their sects, they are proportionate, except that the Khawarij (Kharijites) are numerous in Sijistan and the districts of Harat, Karūkh, and Astarabyan. The Muʿtazilites are evident in Naysabūr, but they do not predominate there, while the Shlʿa and the Karramites are very much in evidence. The majority
263
THE REGION OF AL-MASHRIQ
ofthe people in the region are followers ofAbO Hanlfa, except in the districts of al-Shash, Ilaq, Tos, Nasa, Ablward, TarilZ, and Sanghaj; and the district of Bukhara, Sinj, al-Dandilnaqan, IsfaraʾJn, and Juwayn, all ofthese being Shafiʿites, and the practice in these places is according to their respective schools. They also make themselves felt in Harat, Sijistan, Sarakhs, and Marwayn, and there is no Qadhl except from the two groups [Hanafites and Shafiʿites]. Moreover, the preachers of the places we have excepted [above], and ofNaysabor, also, are Shafiʿites; this is so, also, of one of the two mosques of Marw, except that the iqiima there and in Naysabor is made twice. The Karramites are much in evidence in Harat, and Gharj al-Shar; they have retreats in Farghana, al-Khuttal, and Jozjan(an). In Marw al-Rodh there is a house of religious retreat, another in Samarqand. In the rural districts of Haytal are peoples called Baydh a/-Th،yiib [the white-clad] whose teachings are close to atheism. Groups are here following the teaching of ʿAbd Allah al-Sarakhsl, practicing asceticism, and closeness to God. Most of the people ofTirmidh areJahmiyya [a sect]; the people of al-Raqqa are Shlʿa. The people ofKundur are Qadariyya [believers in predestination]; and the people of al-Shar pray at the two festivals [the Feast oflmmolation, the Feast of Breaking the Ramadhan Fast] according to the doctrine of ʿAbd Allah bin Masʿod. The school of Abo Hanlfa constantly wavers between the two systems of reading, and they exclaim, “Allahu Akbar" [God is Great] four times.
As for commerce here: in Naysabor is produced white clothing of a/-haffiyya and al-baybiiffmethods of weaving]; also turbans of al-shahifan،yya [a type of expensive cloth], a/-haffiyya; of al-riikhtaj, and of al-tiikhtaj [types of expensive cloth]; veils; bayna al-thawbayn [a kind of garment]; al-maliiham [a kind of garment] made of silk, and of plain cloth; also of a/-ʿattābī, and a/-saʿldl, and p. 324 al-zaraʾift, and al-mushtī [kinds of cloth]; bracelets; clothing of hair and of superior yarn; iron, and other things.
From Nasa and Ablward: silk, and clothes made of it; sesame, and its oil; clothes of al-zanbafa [a kind of cloth]. From Nasa clothes made of al-banbuziyya [kind of cloth]; fox fur; and clothing. From Tos, superior earthenware pots; mats; and grain. From the rural districts of Naysabor, much thick clothing. From Harat, much cloth; silk brocade of inferior quality; taffeta; raisins like those of al-Taʾif; a poor sort of dried grapes, both green and red, with essence and syrup of these; steel; pistachios; and most of the confections of Khurilsan. From Marw: al-maliiham [a kind of garment]; veils of silk; silk; cotton; cattle; cheese; cotton seeds [or oil]; oil of sesame; and copper. From Sarakhs, grain and camels. From Sijistan, dates; woven baskets; ropes of bast; and mats.
In Quhistan are produced white clothing resembling that of Naysabor; rugs; fine dates. From Balkh come soap؛ sesame; rice; walnuts; almonds; raisins; dried grapes; clarified butter; honey of grapes dried in the sun; figs; pomegranates; vitriol; sulphur; lead; asbark [a yellow herb]; arsenic; incense; armour like that made in Jurjan; garments; oil and fats; and skins. From Gharj al-Shar: gold؛ felt؛
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
264
saddle bags and the like; excellent horses; and mules. From Tirmidh: ؛fine carpets ؛pistachios ؛almonds ؛walnuts ؛soap; asafetida. From Walwalij: sesame, and its oil fox pelts. From ؛horns ؛clarified butter ؛cheese ؛coverlets ؛chick-peas ؛rice copper-coloured ؛carpeting for inns ؛rugs ؛dried dates ؛Bukhara: fine clothing cloth of [the type made ؛horse girths woven in the prisons ؛hangings ؛candelabra ointment. From Karmlniya, ؛the tallow and hides of sheep ؛in] al-AshmOnayn from Dabosiya and Widhar, Widhiiriyya cloth, which is a cloth ofplain ؛kerchiefs colour, and I heard a ruler in Baghdad call it “the silk brocade of Khurasan." round drinking ؛dried dates ؛From Rabinjan: shawls for the winter, of red felt sulphur. ؛hempen ropes ؛hides ؛cups of an alloy of silver and lead ؛beaver ؛fox ؛fennec and its fur ؛white weasel ؛squirrel ؛From Khwarazm: sable fish ؛[cowls [headgear ؛cork ؛arrows ؛wax ؛goatskin ؛hare pelts variously coloured a skin called] al-kaymakht;] ؛amber ؛[castoreum oil [of beavers ؛fishbones ؛glue slaves from among the ؛khalanj wood ؛armour ؛swords ؛falcons ؛hazelnuts ؛honey cattle-all of these from the territory of the Bulghar. Also from ؛sheep ؛Slavs ؛sesame ؛[maliiban [a kind of confection ؛raisins aplenty ؛Khwarazm: jujubes silk brocade of [a kind called] bishkish; veils of [a ؛blankets ؛carpets ؛garments clothing of [a kind called] aranj; arrows that no ؛cloth called] malham; locks boats ؛fish ؛whey ؛cheese ؛one could use with the bow except the strongest men
and the like from Tirmidh also. ؛hewn and smoothed From Samarqand are exported: silver-coloured cloths, and cloths called ؛stirrups ؛casks ؛excellent long-necked bottles ؛large copper pans ؛Samarqandl girths. From Dlzak: felts the finest, and aqbiya [sing. qabāʾteuter ؛bits long-sleeved garment] of the felts. From Binakath: Turkistan garments. From ؛al-Shash: saddles made of [a skin called] al-kaymakht, of excellent quality ؛dried dates ؛shawls ؛pelts purchased from the Turks, and dyed ؛casks ؛quivers and ؛needles of inferior quality ؛very fine arrows ؛[cottonseed [oil ؛leather cloaks cotton and scissors are sold to the Turks. From Samarqand, also, silk brocade is sold to the Turks, and red cloths called mumarjal; sinizi [cloth made in Slnlz walnuts. From ؛hazelnuts ؛silk aplenty, and garments made of it ؛[or Shlnlz good-quality garments. From Farghana and Isbljab: ؛Tos: beautiful surcingles iron. ؛copper ؛swords ؛engines of war ؛white cloths ؛slaves from among the Turks From Taraz: goatskins. From Shiljl: silver. From Turkistan to these places are and the like also from al-Khuttal. ؛exported horses, mules There is nothing comparable to the silk brocade, embroidery, potters' clay, nor to ؛truffles, shahjiin cloth, needles, knives, and ribiis (currants) of Naysabūr and, ؛the maliiban dates, ishtarghiiz [seasoning plant], the great melons of Marw according to anyone who has not been to al-Ramla, there is nothing in the world like their [Marw] bread, and there is certainly nothing to compare with it in the nor do you see the like of their ؛regions of the non-Arabic speaking peoples harisa. The meat of Bukhara is incomparable, as is a kind of melon called al-siif; similarly the arrows of Khwarazm, the earthenware of al-Shash, the fine paper .of Samarqand, the eggplant of Nasa, the grapes of Harat
p. 32s
p. 326
265
THE REGION OF AL-MASHRIQ
Addition/version MS. c.
Boasting over respective countries arose between al-Hakim ʿAbd al-Hamld and the dignitaries of al-Rayy, at the house of al-Hasan bin Buwayh. Said ʿAbd al-Hamld: “God-—ay He be exalted-has allowed four things on which He did not put a value, and these four things are exported from Naysabflr to remote regions: stone, loam, water, and vegetation. Now the stone is the turquoise, and this is exported to the extreme areas of the world; the loam is an edible clay [Tin Najahl], and this is exported to Egypt and to the land of the Turks; the vegetation-these are the ribiis (white currants), and are exported to the tables of kings; and the water—this is the salt that is exported to distant places for use in medicaments.” And of course this last is the most powerful substance from which there is no danger.
There are many mines in this region. In Naysabūr, in the rural district of Riwand, is a mine of turquoise. In the rural district of [lacuna in MS] is a mine of jet; in the rural district of Bayhaq is a marble quarry. In Tūs is earthenware clay, and in Zūzan an edible clay. In the rural district of [lacuna in MS] is found a clay used for seals and writing. At Barwan is a silver mine, also at Banjahlr and Shiljl-for here is a mountain that extends to Farghana. Ammonia, silver, gold are obtained from Barman; soot from the district of Ilaq sublimated from the smoke of[smelting] silver— is seldom one encounters it in unadulterated form. A spring of mercury bubbles near Quba. This is not derived from a mine; Abū Yūsuf had thought that it was, then he was informed that it is as Abū Hanlfa had said. In Washjird is fine saffron, madder in Quwadiyan. In this territory is naphtha and turquoise, of which the flow cannot be stopped; here also is pitch and asphalt.
Addition/version MS. c.
Here are many mines. From Naysabflr are derived turquoise, jet, marble; the people of Tas make earthenware pots; from Badhakhshan come gems for rings. From Barwan and Banjahlr and Jabal as far as Farghana and Shiljl stretch extensive mines rich in silver. From Ilaq comes ammonia, and here too are mines of gold and silver. Dhu al-fltr, and that is the vapor of [smelting] silver, rises and is collected, and seldom one encounters it in unadulterated form. A spring of mercury bubbles near Qaba—this is not derived from a mine; Abo Yosuf had thought that it was, then he was informed that it was a source such as Abu Hanlfa had said. In Washjird is saffron, in Qawadiyan madder; in Haytal occur naphtha, pitch, and asphalt.
p. 327 The customs in these areas differ from the customs of the regions of the Arabs, in most matters. For example the Sahib a/-Raʾy [upholder of one's subjective judgment in religious matters] and the Sahib al-Hadith [upholder of judgment made on the Qur>an and Sunna-opposed to Sahib a/-Raʾy] carry the dead at burial time from in front of the Qjb/a; but not the Shī<a, for they carry the body head foremost. One day I said to some people in Ablward: “You are a people who follow al-ShafiʿI-may God be pleased with him-and you have the authority in
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
266
your lands to do as you like; so why do you not carry the dead head foremost?" Said they, “We do not agree with the ShlCa, and we disagree with the Muslims." The Imam does not turn his head to right and left at the prayers for the Prophet-God’s peace and blessings be upon him-he has preached. Addition/version MS. c.
. .. except for al-Hakim Abu Sufyan in Sarakhs, for he was among those who journeyed to Baghdad. I did not encounter in all the Eastern provinces a single preacher except it bo this al-Hakim, because they are all stupid, behaving affectedly without eloquence, taking no pleasure in their chanting, which is far frtm perfectexcept in Naysabor, for there the preachers are most accomplished.
The muezzins have a bench in front of the pulpit on which they call to prayer, with chanting tunes. The preacher does not dress specially, neither does he wear the qaba), being attired only in the durrfra; he does not hasten away [after the sermon]. In their mosques are large copper bowls set on stools; ice is put into the water [in them] on Friday; and the people wash the slippers in winter and summer. It is seldom they wear shoes. The preachers do not use a sermonbook. In Marw, Sarakhs, and Bukhara no one preaches except a jurist or a commentator. In the rest of the region anyone who wishes to do so follows the school of Abo Hanlfa; in these three places we have mentioned they preach from a book. In the presence ofimportant rulers a drum is played. Everyone testifies on every matter; however, in' every town is a number of attestors to the reliability of witnesses; and should an opponent attack a witness the attestor is asked about him. No one becomes sophisticated in this practice except a jurist or an important person. Addition/version MS. c.
This is a region that makes the heart hard, and it is not like Syria or Yaman. Abu al-Fadhl bin Nahama informed me of the following tradition. He said that he had it from Zubayr bin Muhammad, who had it from Ismaʿll bin ʿAbd Allah bin MaymUn, who had it from Ismaʿll bin ʿAbd al-Karlm, who had it from Ibrahim bin <ukayl, who had it from his father, who had it from Wahb that he himself heard Jabir bin ʿAbd Allah declare that he heard the Prophet-God’s peace and blessings be upon him—say that there is ruthlessness of heart and coarseness in the people of the Orient, and those of Baghdad, but the law brought by the Prophet is to be found among the people of Yaman.
In Naysabūr are some attractive customs, among them the council of injustices, held every first and fourth day of the week in the presence of the commander of the army, or his deputy. Anyone who presents a case to the court is brought before him, and is treated justly. Around [the commander] sit the judge, the chief, the scholars, and the nobles. On the second and fifth day of every week in Masjid Rajaʾ (the mosque of hope), a council of justice is held, the like of which you do not see elsewhere in Islam. The notables of the town hold a council in the early morning on Fridays, at which the readers gather and read until the forenoon.
p. 328
267
THE REGION OF AL-MASHRIQ
Addition/version MS. c.
The council of the qadhi (judge) is held every second and fifth days of every week in Masjid Rajāʾ, and the council of injustices is held on the first and fourth days in the presence of the ruler or his minister. At the beginning of the councils in the mornings the Readers ofthe Qurʾān assemble there until midday, and read in turn.
They attire themselves in three ways: the jurists and the elders wear the taylasūn, and no one tucks it under his chin except one who is considered stupid. They have a garment which they wear only in the winter; one puts it on, then puts the taylasiin over the turban; over that he then puts the du"āʿa; then from behind he loosens the edge of the du"āʿa that is over the turban: I saw people in Tns, and Ablward, and Harat doing that. The people of Sijistan wind the turbans like crowns. In Ma waraʾ al-Nahr no one wears the taylasiin except an elder; they just wear the qabāʾ open. In Marw the scholars of medium age wear the taylasiin completely gathered on one shoulder, for a period oftime; then when they wish to promote a jurist they bid him wear it in regular manner.
Addition/version MS. c.
The preeminent doctors ofthe law and the leading people wear the tay/asiin and turn the lower part of the turban under the chin; the leading merchants also wear the tay/asan, but do not turn the lower part under the chin. Those oflower rank in either of these classes either do not wear the tay/asan, or, ifthey do, they do not turn the lower part under the chin. One may dress, putting the tay/asiin over the turban, then putting on the durraʿa, then loosening the taylasān wrapped around the turban on to the collar of the durraʿa. Anyone who wishes to do so may ride a horse. No one wears the tay/asiin in Ma waraʾ al-Nahr, unless he be an important doctor of the law or a foreigner; they just wear the qabāʾ, because this side is in the area of the jihad [the holy strife enjoined on Muslims]. Most of the people of Bukhara shrug their shoulders while they are conversing:
I observed Abo Bakr al-Ismaʿl.1 doing so. The sleeves of the qabaʾ worn by the soldiers are narrow. It is the practice here to crack thongs in the air in the presence of the sovereign rulers. One does not enter the baths here unless wearing the mi'zar [wraparound apron, loincloth]. p. 329 Their supplies of water are extensive. At Naysabor are tunnels running under the ground, cold in summer; one may descend to them by from four to seventy steps. Eventually the tunnels emerge in the villages and irrigate them. Some of these that emerge in the town flow around in the quarters of the town, as at al-Hlra, Balfawa [?], and Bab Maʿmar, and Qanat Abl ʿAmr al-Khaffaf, Qanat Shad-yakh, Zuqaq al-Dariyyln, and Suwar Karlz-in all of these places the canals flow at the surface. In some places sweetwater wells are found. Afarsakh away in the village of Bushtaqan is a stream that turns seventy mills. Addition/version MS. c.
The waters are widely distributed in Naysabor. Here are conduits to which
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
268
descent is made by flights of from three to seventy steps. It was told me of Abo Nasr al-ʿAbbadl, that he said that if the waters at Naysabor were gathered together they would exceed those of the Tigris at Baghdad. The inhabitants have also a number of water channels that flow at the surface of the ground; also a stream about a farsakh distant on which seventy mills are situated. Some of their wells have sweet water.
Sijistan has a number of streams that irrigate the towns and the villages. Among them is the River Hlrmld (Hilmand) which emerges from beyond the land of the Ghnr towards the south; it flows down to the town of Bust, then forms branches about a post stage from Zaranj. The Nahr al-Ta'lim is drawn from it passing through the rural districts, until it reaches Nlshak. Next the Nahr Bllshtarndh is drawn from it, which irrigates Bust. Then the river descends, irrigating a number of the villages as far as Kazak; there, a dam has been built which holds back the water so that it does not flow to the lake. In this district is the Nahr Farah which emerges from close to the country of the Ghor, irrigating those areas; the rest of it flows into Lake al-Sanat [Zarah]. It forms a permanent sweetwater lake there in the direction of Kirmān; the length of this lake is more than twenty farsakhs, and its width a post stage [about thirty miles]. Much fish is taken from it; with hamlets and reeds on its edge it resembles al-Bataʾih (marshes) of al-Cirllq.
Addition/version I c.
Sijistan has a number of rivers, among them Nahr Hlrmld (Hilmand) which emerges from beyond al-GhOr, in the direction of Bust. It then forms branches, and irrigates the two districts. Here also is the Nahr Farah, which emerges from close to the country ofthe Ghor, then flows to a lake towards Kirman, on its way there irrigating a number of rural districts. This lake measures two stages in length by one stage wide, and contains a considerable population of fish.
The River Har:lt emerges from below the country of the Ghnr, forming branches at the beginning of the district. A branch flows from it to the p. 330 capital. The river flows through the country to the gardens, where there is a bridge, the like of which, as a marvel of construction, is not to be found in all Khur:ls:ln. A Magian man built it, and wrote his name on it. In constructing it, the builders consumed a thousand sacks of salt. It is said that the ruler wished that his name be written on the bridge; some say that [the builder] became a Muslim, some say that he threw himself into the river. Near the capital seven canals branch out from it: Nahr Barkhuwl irrigating the rural district of Sandāsank; Nahr Bllrisht irrigating the rural district of Kwashlln, and Siyllwashān, and Mlllin, and Tlz:ln; Nahr Adhrljan irrigating the rural district of Siislln, and Knkan; Nahr Ghnsmiln irrigating the rural district of Kark; Nahr Kank irrigating the rural district of Ghnban, and Karabkird; Nahr Sanfaghar irrigating the rural district of Sarakhs, at the border of Boshanj; Nahr Anjlr irrigating the capital.
٧I 3J3M JOJ uotu q٧؛auuatps s ااأ3 ٧3٧BM jnod pjnow ؛OJU ااأ3 iBuidBD داأ؛8 ODBjd ؛s paMOy ‘snip ‘tpilJMJO usouu ؛OJU اا31 uuvp دا1٧31ء puvq^Bg SB JEJ SB paMOy J31EM ااأ3 auo Aq 3UO squvgi asoqu posjEJ ajdoad‘ ؛A\ 33Bd u!M٧ ااأ3 j؛s؛،J3٧BA\ aqujo 3u ٧؛J3AO paOBjd SU3٩UU ؛٧- jnp ‘J3A3U31JM؛3u اا31 jauuuuns‘ اا31 jnjtuuagi SBM J3٧BM M B OS ‘pooy ou pasn UJ (qps٩BiqB^i) qps٩S(B^i؛SBM uucp 3p n٩؛٧i tpiAS ‘auaqu
J3٧u3 ‘gugqqng UB spua (ucqsABjaz) pqSns-iB fN؛3u ااأ3 UUOJJ iBuidBD pUB 3lIU033٩ UO٩؛3u
؛puB ‘SJEUBO aqujo uopuauu 3pnj3u ااأ3 jp ou saoBjd؛٩u) ااأ3 ٩٥٥٩ U3q٧3u3j pjnow UUOJJ uuaqu OJ pauado ااأ3 J؛paau OJ aujpjoooB (J3A؛ ou 3U3M 3MJI SIPM U33MS OSJB 3 3JB3J3JJ؛SUJ3٧S) ٧IA\ ‘sdajs Aq paigtBOjddv ‘uado puB P3J3A03 q٧o٩}njs 1؛33 s3٧b3 لآا1؛ل3 ؛٧ ؛s ؛u اا31 UMOU ؛٧ ؛JO uaquunu B Aq passojo s j٩؛٧33UUoo sa3p؛3u اا31 -SJ33JJS ااأ3 suaquBiu؛ uaqu ؛٧ UB uno sooa ااأ3 JO pus ااأ3 UMOU ؛SUUB3JJS JO Jpouunu B u puB ااأ3 UJ •saheiiiA ؛W-IE ■fN s؟؛؟tginouqu sjno uvqu U ااأ3 ٧BJ٧3U3d ‘umou؛3u UUOJJ ‘qBUUBjznuumH ااأ3 p؛٧33J؛SlfflBJBg JO uo ؛JJ؛S3٧b3 اا31 UU3U٧X3؛0 ‘UMOU aqujo ٩g JO J3p UgqgUUBUJW JO pUB UglUBg؛3A اا31؛ل jp؛٩u؛٧3٧BA\ 3u• (JEUBO) fN E روس 3 daap؛UUOJJ "SUJ3٧S ٧اأ3 auo puoaas‘ ٧اأ3 PW؛‘ ااأ3 uauuvnb aqujo ajdoad Op جءا3 UUOJJ ااأ3 p؛٧33J؛JO uo ااأ3 s٩m٩ns؛ ؛٧ SJ3JU3 ااأ3 dn sujds puB Xup ؛OJU
UUOJJ SJEUBO unoj ٧٠ 3لاا3ل اأأ3 ٥J^Aq SMoy (bizB^i) bjBZ-1. Jtj٠N-u ااأ3 USO( SBM -Qaadoudjo uunouuB
S^BN؟j٠٩‘ اا31 uuvp ٧SJn٩‘ pUB اا31 paipUBM ajdoad اا31 asdciioo؛ SU03 B؛3I٩BJ3p ds JO؛ipitjAt S3٩ ااأ3دJOJ Ajrep pauvdaud daaq ااأ3 ٧؛paaujo 3U٧ لآاأ؛ل3 SEM I ؛u ٧IA\}uuaqu JO UBUU Xjoao Ml XBM 1 ؛03 B puB pooM JO uunouuB paxy B sلل33ا؛٧0أ JI puB ااأ3دJ3JU3 OJ paau ااأ3 UOIJM J3٧EM ؛٧ ؛nb s؛3٧ saAjasuuaqu UBOO Xotp (Ploo ٧U3UU؛P pajpunq moj 3JE USUIJ p3U٥؛BUU otjAt SJ3A؛B٧U؛U اا31 ‘^cp puB utgiitr uucp puB ‘sjbubo ااأ3 U3٧BM ؛p s؛J٧S؛uo p3٧n٩ اا31 SB٩؛JESjEUddE aqujo S ٧٧ اا31 3A\ 33Bjd uupB؛u؛٧BJ٧s؛uo؛ uatp ااأ3دIJB OJ sjaSuassauu puss ااأ3 tpuBuq aqujo sjosjAtadns ٧3٧BM‘ اأ3 spuas ااأ3 UB ahessauu اأ؛3اأ OJ ^UBoygtads paads ااأ3 JO 33IJJO ااأ3 J؛J3A ااأ3 Xjp‘ ؛B u ٩؛UOIJAV papunou ‘puod JO pu ااأ3 J3dns؛٧u3pu3٧u saSnca ااأ3 ٥ ءءا أبمول3 II٧M uqanojp JO JBoX B 3٩ داأ3؛ل ٧B٧s juauuajnsBauu؛uo ؛UUOJJ ifHvsuvJ B s ajdoad ل3؛0ل33 jsnf ااأ3 UOIJM ‘atlUBS اا31 s [^juo] IJ3B3J SajnSBSUU؛x SUJ03^3JJB٩ uo UMOqS اا31 s S31J3B3J jsod؛٧x^ SUJ03^3JJB٩‘ أبمول3 II٧AS pUB ‘JBOX pooa B 3٩ اا31 qupiM [U33M٧3٩ ااأ3 BJO [squBiu USIJM UJ03^3[JB٩ ااأ3 J J3٧EM؛qudap s٧t uvqu OS S3S ٧I dpq uotu pjnoo I 3J31JM udaoxa ،، usod V ؛S٧I auojB paquBiu ‘pa٧33J3 s ل٧3أةااأ‘ ااأ3 ؛٧sn[jo UU3UU3J3 UB JOU s؛33 patogiuua JOU OABIJ I uvqu ؛٧JoddB u؛uo؛3u ااأ3 \،U3٧BA JO اا31 J3٧EM؛ pUB ؛٧ ؛JO patriot s اا31 SUOJUJOddB OlJAt UBUU ؛٧ uvqu ا31 BS؛p: „دا31ل3 ٧sun٩ ^UB 33S JOU op no^q٧؛3u ٧3٧٧3٩ uvqu 3٧B٧n33B 3JOUU JO ااأ3 ٧J0ddE؛٧U3UUU0 q puvsnoqu؛3JE uauupouBM puB ‘uuu p3٧ أبمول3 3UB3 asoqM ؛uvqu s ااأ3 JOU saop uuvp \٧IA}jn[ 3JOUU 1؛ps؛٧3؛uvqu uo ااأ3 JO japUBUUUUOO اا31 jjb3؛uos؛ q jspun؛U3J 3JE u٧ \٧IA}1 ااأ3 puB ‘uajuno ؛٧ japUBUUUUOO V 'ijv SB JEJ SB spuajxa ؛s ؛3 uا1ءلج3 ا31ل3 uuvp uapooM 3I٩B٩JBU٧3J B Xq sapjs q٧o٩• داأ3 J3٧EM ؛s ؛puun papunoduu ؛٧ ؛s ل3٨3ل ٧no٩B Xq aheus B‘ ؛٧ ABJ daap B saipcaj؛scq MDIIJAS (3U UUOJJ dn paddojs U33٩
spuBMOu aujujnu tuaip ‘asjbw jadd^ ٦°سول U31 ASJBW ؛٧ auaqu passed seq
UUOJJ saSuatua U^BMJBJ^ĪB uqBM MO(3٩ ااأ3 JO ^Jjunoo ااأ3 هاأ0لءM0y؛OJ 3u
faltfHSVW-TV JO NOIOS^ 3HL
69Z
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
270
called Filshnn. At the lower end of the city, also, is another sluice called Raʾs al-Waragh, similarly constructed. This stream flows through the town, penetrates the markets, and branches off into the streets. There are wide, uncovered cisterns in the town, on the edges of which structures of boards, with doors, have been erected, in which people wash. Sometimes the water of the stream overwhelms the overflow to Baykand, and the hamlets will be submerged in the summer. p. 332 The year. I came there it flooded over many villages, so that people were impoverished. The elders went out to the dam, and the shaykh Abu al-ʿAbbils al-YazdildI generously spent a large sum of money on it as a pious work. The water is really dirty, for a lot of excrement is thrown into it in the town. They say that the root of the name Bukhilril is K-w-h Khūriin; the “h" and the “w" were dropped to make it easier to pronounce, so it became Kakhiirii. Then some substituted a “b" for the “k", to misrepresent it to people, so it became Bukhilril. I have heard one of the literati reciting:
The bāʾ [b] of Bukhilril is bāʾ that merely makes the word bigger; and the a/if[a] in the middle is of no avail to it; then nothing remains but “kharil" [excrement].
The river comes out of Samarqand; however, there are streams meeting it that come from the mountains from which waters flow to a lake beyond al-Saghilniyiln. The Sughd River then flows to Raʾs al-Sakr [Waraghsar], and the canals of Samarqand branch off from it; a large canal flows around the city, another through it.
Addition/version MS. c.
The origin of Nahr al-Sughd is from the mountains, and its debouchure is at a lake that is beyond al-Saghaniyan; on its banks stand a considerable number of villages. Above Bukhara, a dam has been constructed on it at a place called Fashfln, and timbers placed over it: whenever during the summer the water was plentiful the people raised those timbers one by one, so most ofthe water flowed into the dam, and thus irrigated the villages in that area. Were it not for this scheme the capital would certainly be inundated. At the lower end of the city also is another dam similar to this; the water here is turbid, with much sediment, and said to contain various objects.
I do not know of bad water in this region except that of Kish and Nasil, and in the rural district of Tabas al-Tamr. There is no bad air here either except at Zamm, and there the people are yellow in colour. The air of NaysilbOr and Samarqand is good, and [whoever breathes it] needs fat food; in fact the lives of the people of NaysilbOr are lengthened by the healthiness of the air. Someone said that it was said to ʿAbd Allilh bin Tilhir, “Why did you choose NaysilbOr over Marw?" Said he, “For three things: for I myself saw that its air was more healthy, its people more humble, and old aged people abounding there."
271
THE REGION OF AL-MASHRIQ
Addition/version MS. c.
There is no harmful climate here except that of Nasi\ and Zamm, and the country district ofTabas, and Kish: these are indeed plague-stricken places, and the people are yellow in colour. The air at NaysllbOr and Samarqand is healthy and creates a need for fat food, entering the baths, and oil of violets. In any case, the lengthening of the lives of the people of Naysabflr is because of the climate.
I have been informed that ʿAbd Allllh bin Tllhir said that he preferred Naysabflr over Marw for three reasons: its climate is better, its people more humble, and old aged people are many there.
Among the remarkable things: at Naysabor is a mountain the soil of which is black like ink; letters and so forth are written with it, and an impress is put on books with it. There are mountains at Haytal and Naysabor from which the people cut the salt, just as rock is cut. Here also is a tree, and when the fruit of it is cut open a creature with wings comes out, and flies. Maʾ Mazul, Masjid Rajaʾ, and Tahona Ibn [lacuna in MS] and !wan Abu Muslim. The windmills in Sijistan and Boshanj, and the fortress at Zaranj are among the marvels. At Sarakhs is a spot to which a bird ascends one day every year and throws itself down; the people collect many fragments of it. At Mazdoran is a cave, no end to which is known.
Addition/version MS. j:
In the country district of Sarakhs is a place at which a bird arrives at a certain time of the year and casts itself down there; it does not come except at that time.
At Mazdflrān is a cave which it is not possible for anyone to enter; there are stories told about it. At Sijistan and Boshanj are mills which the wind turns, and there are some remarkable features to the sands there. The fortress of Zaranj, the mill at Bar, and Maʾ MilZul are among the remarkable sights here.
Here are shrines: the grave of (All al-Ridha is at Tus; over it a stronghold has been built in which are houses and a market. Moreover, <Amld al-Dawla Faʾiq has built a prayer house over it, and there is no finer than it in Khurasan. Afarsakh from Sarakhs is the grave of the son of his paternal uncle, over which a shrine has been built. Two farsakhs from Marw is an outpost wherein is a small grave which people say is the grave of the head of Husayn the son of (All-may God be pleased with him. At Tabas is the grave of two of the Companions of the Prophet. On the bank of the River Jayhon is Ribat [outpost] ofDhu al-Qamayn؛ opposite it to the east is Ribat Dhu al-Kifl, and it is said that a chain used to be drawn across between the two.
At the edge of Nasa is the guardhouse of Afrawa, and opposite Ablward is the guardhouse of Kofan. Behind those Abu al-Qasim al-Mikall built two guardhouses on which he spent much money. He brought thither equipment, and many machines. He endowed the two establishments with considerable bequests, tapped many sweet water wells in them, and established a number of villages; his grave is there. Between Naysabor and Quhistan is Ribat Suhayl,
p. 333
p. 334
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
272
extensively appointed. A hot spring is here: some have said that the cold grew severe on the Companions of the Prophet-God's peace and blessings be upon him-and they prayed to God-may He be exalted-so that this spring emerged for them for their ablutions. A number of graves of the Companions are there. In Baykand is a mosque, well appointed. Ribat al-Nūr is beyond Bukhara; it has a fair every year; also Dast Qatawan.
The languages vary. The speech of the people of Naysabūr is grammatically correct, understandable. However, they insert the vowel i at the beginning of words, and they add yO [read bāʾ], for instance begu and beshaw (“he should become"). They also add sīn[s] unnecessarily as bikhurdasti (“you have eaten"), bighuftasti, bikhuftasti (“you have said"), and so on like that. In their speech is a flaccidity and indistinctness of utterance.
The people of Tūs and Nasa have better speech.
The speech of the people of Sijistan is drawled; they bring out the vehemence of it in their guttural pronunciation, and enunciate it aloud.
The speech of the people ofBust is better.
The speech ofal-Marwayn [the two Marws] is unobjectionable, even though they drawl, lengthen, and stretch the ends of their words. Do you not notice that the people of Naysabūr say ba-rayi-een, and say ba-taroon-een, meaning “for the sake of', and that they have added a letter. Pay attention to this matter, and you will find it is quite common.
The language of Balkh is the finest of all; however, they have words in it that are disapproved of.
The language of Harat is coarse. You notice them speaking and wagging their jaws, in an affected manner, drawling the words; then after all that, they utter the speech hesitantly and with a drawl. I heard one of the followers of al-Maʿdanl say, “One ofthe kings ofKhurasan ordered his ministers to assemble men one each from the five districts of Khurasan, the principal districts. When they were assembled, the SijistanI spoke, on which the minister said, ‘This language is suitable for fighting.' Then he conversed with the Naysabūrl, and, said he, ‘This language is suited for litigation.' Then he spoke with the person from Marw, and said, ‘This language is suited for government ministry.' Then he spoke with the man from Balkh, and said, ‘This language is fit for despatches.' Then when the man from Harat spoke, said he, ‘This language is fitted for the cesspool.' " These are the basic languages of Khurasan, the others follow them, are derived from them, stem from them.
The language of Tūs and Nasa is close to that of Naysabūr; the language of Sarakhs and Ablward is close to the language of Marw. The language of Gharj al-Shar is between the languages of Harat and Marw. The language ofJūzjan is between that of Marw and Balkh. The language of al-Bamiyan and Tukharistan is close to that ofBalkh-however, they are both hard to understand. The language of Khwarazm is incomprehensible. There is repetition in the language of the
P. 335
273
THE REGION OF AL-MASHRIQ
people ofBukhara; do you not notice how they say yaki adrami (“one drachma"), and “I saw yaki mardi" (“one man"), and so forth; one says, atiytu adarami, so you may have an idea by analogy how they speak. They frequently use the word danisti (“you know") in their speech, without any real reason. In any case this is the darriyya, the most chaste and prestigious dialect; and in fact language of this kind is called darriyya since it is the language in which the letters of the ruler are written, and in which reports are submitted to him. The derivation is from dar [door, gate, in the sense of palace], referring to the fact that it is the language that is spoken at the court. The people of Samarqand use a sound that is between the “kaf' [k] and the “qaf' [q]; they say [a sound that is between] b-k-r-d-k-m and b-q-r-d-q-m, and b-k-f-t-k-m and b-qf-t-q-m, and so on. There is a stability in the language. The language of al-Shash is the best language of Haytal. The language of al-Sughd is unique to it and is approximated by the languages of the rural districts of Bukhara, which are quite varied, but understood among them; p. 336 and I witnessed the venerable Imam, Muhammad Ibn al-Fadhl speaking in it often. There are few towns of those we mentioned but that they have, and their rural districts have, one more language.
There is variety in the coloration of the people: the fairest of them are the people of al-Shash and al-Farghana, and the places in that area; then the people of Nasaf, and Taraz, and Barab; and their women are incomparable. Then the people of Samarqand, then the people of Bukhara, then the people of Marw-and that's it! The coloration of the people of Tabas al-Tamr resembles that of the people of al-Hijaz; similarly the people of Sijistan and GhaznIn. The people of Khwarazm are white and ruddy; however they are distinguished by other characteristics.
There is partisanship between the western half of Naysabūr—it is the higher half, and pertains to ManIshak-and the other half, pertaining to al-HIra: there is frightful bigotry against any other sect. And now it has arisen between the Shlʿa and the Karramiyya. There is fanaticism in Sijistan between al-Samakiyya, they being the followers of AbO Hanlfa-may God have mercy upon him——d al-Sadaqiyya, they being the followers of al-ShafiʿJ—may God be pleased with him. Blood is shed in these discords, so that the ruler intervenes. In Sarakhs the discord is between al-ʿArOsiyya, who are followers of Abū Hanlfa, and al-Ahaliyya, who are followers of al-ShafiʿJ; in Harat, between al-ʿAmaliyya and al-Karramiyya; in Marw, between the city people and those of al-Sūq al-ʿAtlq (the old market); in Nasa, between the people of al-Khanah and those of the extremity of the market; in AbIward, between the Kurds and the extremity of the town. I heard a man say, “An owl has not drunk from the water without becoming a fanatic." In Balkh there is bigotry against any other sect, similarly Samarqand. Of all the towns there are few that are free from fanaticism.
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
274
Government. In this entire region the dynasty of Silman is mentioned in the Friday sermon; and the land tax is paid to them, except by the amirs of Sijistlln, Khwllrazm, Gharj al-Shllr, jOzjlln, Bust, Ghaznln, and al-Khuttal-they send gifts only, and their rulers avail themselves of the land taxes. The commander of the army is stationed in Naysabūr; Sijistan is under the control of the dynasty of ʿAmr bin al-Layth; Gharj is under control of al-Shllr; jOzjan is under control of the dynasty of Farlghūn; Ghaznln and Bust are under the Turks. Addition/version MS. c.
Jurisdictions here are many; however, the dynasty of Saman is mentioned in the Friday sermon, and gifts are given to them. Sijistan is under the control of the Banfl Banfl, and Jflzjanan of Banfl Farlghūn; Gharj is under control of al-Shar,
Bust and Ghaznln under control of the Turks; Khwarazm is under the control of two amlrs. The land taxes of these places are paid respectively to those whose rulership we have mentioned. These areas are the abode of justice and meritorious services in respect of the religion of Islam.
The first to govern this entire region was Ismaʿll Ibn Ahmad in the year 287/900, when he set out for Bukhara. Al-Muʿtadhad added to it Kirman and Jurjlln; al-Muktafl, in the year 90/709, added al-Rayy, and al-Jiblll as far as ʿAqabat Hulwm. When he died the people nicknamed him al-Mlldhl (the vigorous one). His son Ahmad reigned after him; he was killed in Firabr, and they called him al-Shahld (the martyr). After him his son Nasr reigned, and his chamberlain was AbO Jaʿfar Dhnghwll; the commander of his army was Hammawayh. His vizier was Abu al-Fadhl Ibn YaʿqOb al-Naysl\būrI, then Abu al-Fadhl al-Balʿaml, then AbO ʿAbd Allllh al-Jayhllnl. When he died they called him al-Saʿld (the auspicious). Then his son NOh reigned, and his chamberlain was RashIq al-HindI, then AlftakIn (Alp TakIn); the commander of his army was AbO ʿAll al-Saghanl, then Ibn Mlllik, then Ibn Qaratakln; his vizier was AbO MansOr bin ʿUzayr, then al-Hllkim al-Jalll. When he died they named him al-HamId (the benign). He had assigned three of his sons to three of his eunuchs-ʿAbd al-Malik to Najllh, Mansūr to Fl\ʾiq, and Nasr to Zarlf. Then they put ʿAbd al-Mlllik on the throne, and his like has not been in the dynasty of Saml\n. His chamberlain was Alftakln, then he appointed his slave as successor. The commander of his army was Ibn Malik, then Alftakln. He fell from his riding animal, died, and they named him al-Rashld (the rightly guided). They enthroned his [of al-Hamld] son Nasr for one day; then Fl\ʾiq assembled the army, deposed him, and installed his patron, al-MansOr. His chamberlain was AbO Mansūr Bllqrll [?], then Qalj. The commander of his army was Ibn ʿAbd al-Razzllq, then Abu al-Hasan Ibn SlmjOr. His vizier was Amlrak Bal'amI, then al-ʿAtabl; then he restored al-Balʿaml, then he restored al-ʿAtabl. When he died they named him al-SadId (the correct). They enthroned his son Nūh, and his chamberlain was Tllsh; then Ho Anj. The commander of his army was Ibn SlmjOr; then he put TllSh in command of it; then he restored Abu al-Hasan
p. 337
P• 338
275
THE REGION OF AL-MASHRIQ
Ibn Slmjnr. His vizier was Ibn al-Jayhanl; then Ibn al-ʿAtabl; then al-Mazinl; then al-Istakhrl; then ʿAbd Allah bin CUzayr; then Abn ʿAll Muhammad bin ʿīsa al-Damghanl. They (the dynasty) are from a village in the districts ofSamarqand called Saman, and their origin goes back to Bahram Jnr; and God has given them victory and power. They are among the best of kings in conduct and administration; the most sublime in the knowledge of God and the people of that knowledge. Among the sayings of the people: “If a tree were to revolt against the house of Saman, it would wither." Do you not see ʿAdhud al-Dawla, how he grew powerful and held sway; and the fullness of his power, the nobility of his situation! He was mentioned in the Friday sermon in all al-Yaman, which he overcame without a war-there was not a thing that crawled that was not entered in one of his books. Moreover, he sent a messenger, and was mentioned in the Friday sermon in al-Sind. He conquered CUman, and what he held he controlled. But when he opposed the dynasty of Saman and demanded Khurasan, God destroyed him, and scattered his host; dispersed his armies, and put his enemies in possession of his kingdoms. May he perish who opposes the house of Saman! Addition/version MS. c.
In the year 90/708, al-Muktafl entrusted to Ismaʿll the governance of al-Rayy and al-Jibal, the people of glorious deeds and virtues. I enquired of Zarlf what the king did at the time his army was defeated in Jurjan. He raised his hand, and said he: “0 God! you still support my ancestors and secure their state; and now these Daylamites had invaded us and this tyrant oppressed us, and if they are more wicked than we, give us victory over them.” And but little time elapsed before the death ofʿAdhud al-Dawla was disclosed. Thereafter, his brother died, as did the commander of their army, and God-may He be exalted-scattered their forces, dispersed their hosts, destroyed their offspring, except for any one of them that returned to the religion of al-Islam, and was reconciled. p. 339 Among their [Samanids] customs: they exempt the doctors of the law from kissing the ground. They hold councils at night on the Fridays in the month of Ramadhan, for discussion in the presence of the ruler. He begins by asking a question; then those present speak on it. They incline towards the school of Abn Hanlfa. It is not their custom to be familiar with their subjects, but rather it is the vizier who takes care of affairs. So if they wish to promote a man they seat him with them at the diwan, as was done in the case of al-Shaykh Abu al-ʿAbbas al-Yazdadl. Sometimes they speak person to person with messengers on important matters, as they spoke to al-Shaykh Abū Salih, when they sent him to the commander of the army, Abu al-Hasan. They always select the most expert legists in Bukhara, and the most upright of them they elevate, and act on his opinion; they fulfill his requests, and appoint the deputies on his word: an instance is the elder, the venerable Imam, Muhammad bin al-Fadhl. In fact, the people eventually consider this the regular practice. They also point to whoever will succeed them; do you not observe their indicating al-Hakim al-Imam
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
276
Muhammad bin Yusuf, because he is the wisest and most respected of the elders?
Addition/version MS. c.
But their court is not wanting in important notables and those whose judgments are influential; for example al-Shaykh Abu al-Hasan bin al-Fadhl, who, you would think, when he was instructing the ruler, had received some of his knowledge from beyond; or the likes of al-Shaykh Abo Ishaq al-Shue:tybl, of good lineage, whose beneficence is evident to all people who have recourse to him. And I heard some of the notables say to Abu Nasr al-Harbl that there was not at the court a person more warm or more beneficial to the Muslims than al-Shaykh Abo Ishaq.
As for the land-taxes: On Farghana, two hundred eighty thousand muhammadiyya [dirhams]; on al-Shash, one hundred eighty thousand musayyibiyya [dirhams]; on p. 340 Khujanda, by way of tithes, one hundr؟d thousand musayyibiyya. On al-Sughd, and Kish, and Nasaf, and Ushrūsana, one thousand thousand, and thirty-nine thousand, and thirty-one muhammadiyya dirhams. The land tax of Isbljab is four danaqs, sent with a broom to the ruler every year with the gifts. The land tax of Bukhara is one thousand thousand and one hundred thousand, and sixty-six thousand, eight hundred ninety-seven ghitrifiyya dirhams. They were three brothers, Muhammad and Musayyib and Ghitrlf; they struck these dirhams which are black, used for small coinage. They are current only in Haytal, and are preferred over the white. The land tax of al-Saghaniyan is forty-eight thousand, five hundred twenty-nine dirhams; on Wakhkhan, forty thousand. On Khwarazm: four hundred twenty thousand, one hundred twenty of their dirhams, the dirham here equaling four and one half danaqs. I found in a book that the basic land tax of Khurasan is forty-four million, eight hundred thousand, nine hundred thirty dirhams, and thirteen dirhams; of beasts, twenty riding animals and two thousand sheep; of slaves one thousand and twelve head; of ore and sheets of iron, one thousand three hundred pieces. The imposts are light; but they are heavy on slaves at the bank of the JayhOn River. One may not send a male slave across without a permit from the ruler; and with a permit one may take from seventy to a hundred. Similarly, in the case of women slaves without a permit if they are Turks, an impost is levied from twenty to thirty dirhams on each woman. On a camel it is two dirhams, and on the effects of the rider, one dirham. They send back ingots of silver to Bukhara, and it is because of this that the inspection takes place. At the way stations the impost is from a dirham to half a dirham. Addition/version MS. c.
The land tax there is light; however, it was doubled at the time of al-Amlr al-Hamld for a project to which he gave his attention; so he asked for a loan of the land tax for a year, and it has remained in force to the present time. The land tax ofNaysabOr is one million one hundred eight thousand six hundred dirhams; and on three of its treasuries one million six hundred twenty-four thousand
277
THE REGION OF AL-MASHRIQ
eight hundred forty-seven. The land tax of Sijistiln is nine hundred forty-seven thousand dirhams; Qadama mentions that the land tax of Sijistan is three million eight hundred eleven thousand, on Ghazna two thousand slaves valued at six hundred thousand dirhams, on Kabulistan one million five hundred thousand dirhams. The land tax on Balkh amounts to one hundred ninety-three thousand three hundred dirhams, on Khulm twelve thousand dirhams; on Tukharistan and al-Bamiyan one hundred fifty-six thousand four hundred thirty-two dirhams; on Jflzjan two hundred twenty thousand four hundred dirhams; on Marw al-Rudh one million two hundred thirty-seven. The land tax on Marw al-Shah is one million one hundred thirty-two thousand one hundred eighty-four dirhams; the land tax on Harat and its districts, one million nine hundred thirty-five thousand four hundred twenty-one dirhams. The land tax on Quhistan is nine hundred eighty-seven thousand eight hundred eighty dirhams; the land tax on Sarakhs is ninety thousand, and the land tax of Khwarazm four hundred twenty thousand one hundred twenty Khwarazml dirhams; on Tirmidh and Zamm sixty-seven thousand and forty-two dirhams. The land tax on Bukhara is one million one hundred sixty-six thousand eight hundred seventy-seven ghitrfiyya dirhams, and al-Saghaniyan fifty-nine thousand five hundred twenty-nine. The land tax on al-Sughd, Kish, Nasaf, and al-Buttam, is one million and thirty-nine thousand and thirty-one muhammadyya [dirhams]; the land tax on al-Shash is one hundred eighty thousand musayyifoiyya dirhams. The land tax on Farghana is two hundred thirty thousand muhammadiyya; the annual tribute in tithing at Khujanda, one hundred thousand musayyibiyya. The land tax at Isbljab is four danaqs and a broom. The imposts in the region are light, the heaviest being those on the Jayhun; indeed, there is no inspection here except, possibly, on a load of ingots [of precious metals]. A Turkish slave may not cross over except by permission, seventy dirhams being taken per head. The annual tribute from the mines ofNaysabflr, from turquoise and other materials, amounts to seven hundred fifty-eight thousand seven hundred twenty dirhams.
p. 341 The distances in this region:
From Akhslkath to Quba, one stage; thence to Aʾūsh, one stage; thence to Uzkand, one stage; thence to al-ʿAqaba, one stage; thence to Tabash, one stage; thence to Barskhan al-Aʿlā (Upper), six stages; thence to the site of Bughrakhaqan, a like distance. From Akhslkath to Bab, two post stages; thence to Turmughan, a half stage; thence to Jajistan, one stage; thence to Samghar, two post stages; thence to Khujanda, one stage.
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
278
From Isbljilb to Shilwilb, two post stages;
thence to Badnkhkath (Barnjkath), a like distance;
thence to Tamtilj, one stage;
thence to Bilrjilkh, two post stages;
thence to a way-station, one stage;
thence to Shilwaghar, a half stage;
and from Shawaghar to Tarilz, two post stages.
From Isbljab to Gharkard, two post stages; thence to Binkath, one stage; and you go from Binkath to Sutnrkath, one stage; thence to Binilkath, two post-stages; thence to the river at al-Shilsh, two post stages; thence to Khilwas, one stage; thence to Zilmln, one stage.
From Binkath al-Shash to Maʿdin al-Fidhdha, one stage; thence to jiljistiln, one stage; thence to Turmughiln, one stage.
From Binkath to Gharkard, one stage; thence to Isbljilb, two post stages.
From Zilmln to Khilwas, one stage;
from Zilmln .to Silbilt, two post stages; thence to Shilwakath, one stage; thence to Khujanda, one stage.
From Samarqand to Zarmiln, one stage; thence to Rabinjan, one stage; thence to al-DabOsiya, one stage; thence to Karmlniya, one stage; thence to al-Tawilwls, one stage; thence to Dimas, one stage; thence to Bukhilrii, one stage.
From Samarqand to Zamin, one stage; thence to Khilwas, one stage; thence to Binilkath, one stage; thence to Sutnkath (UshtOrkath), one stage; thence to Binkath, one stage.
p. 342
From Samarqand to Dirizdah, one stage; thence to Kish, one stage;
279
THE REGION OF AL-MASHRIQ
thence to Kandak, one stage; thence to Bilb al-Hadld, one stage; thence to Qarna, one stage; thence to Tirmidh, one stage. p. 343 From Bukhilrā to Baykand, one stage; thence to Miyiln Kill, one stage; thence to Firabr, one stage; thence to JayhOn, a halffarsakh.
From Bukhilril to Jikm, one stage; thence to Ribilt ʿAtlq, one stage; thence to Jubb SaʿJd, one stage; thence to Bazda, one stage; thence to Ribilt Khwilriln, one stage; thence to Qaryat al-Bukhilrlyyln, one stage; thence to Qryat al-Khwilrazmlyyln, one stage; thence to Balkhiln, one stage; thence to Killif, one stage; thence to Mahallat al-Qayyilsln, one stage; thence to Tirmidh, one stage.
From Bukhilril to Amzah, two post stages; thence to Ribllt Tilsh, one stage; thence to ShOrOkh, one stage; thence to al-Raml, one stage; thence to Ribilt Tughiln, one stage; thence to Ribilt Jikarband, one stage; thence to Ribilt Hasan, one stage; thence to Nilbildghln, one stage; thence to the narrows of the river, one stage; thence to Ribllt Milsh, one stage; thence to Ribilt Sandah, one stage; thence to Bagharqiln, one stage; thence to Shurilkhiln, one stage; thence to Kilth, one stage.
From Kilth to Khils, one stage;
thence to Nozkilt, two post stages;
thence to Wilyikhiln, on the right bank, one stage;
thence to NObilgh, one stage;
thence to Mazdilkhqiln, in desert, two stages;
thence to Darsiln, two post stages;
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
280
thence to Kardar, one stage; thence to Juwayqan, two post stages; thence to Qaryat Baratakln, one stage; thence to the lake, one stage. p. 344 From Ribat Mash to Amlr, one stage; thence to Barab Sar, two stages; thence to Ardhakhlwa, one stage.
From Mazdakhqan to Wardaragh, one stage;
thence to Kardar, one stage.
From Kath to Ghardaman, one stage; thence to Wayikhan, two post stages; thence to Ardhakhlwah, one post stage; thence to Nawkabagh (Nawkafagh), one stage.
From Awzarmand to Daskakhan Khas, two post stages; thence to Rakhushmlthan, one stage; thence to Khlwa, one stage; thence to Kardarankhas, two post stages; thence to Zardokh, one post stage; thence to Hazarasp, two post stages.
From Awzarmand (Wazarmand) to Rnzawand, one post-stage; thence to Nozwar, one stage; thence to Zamakhshar, one stage, and similarly to al-Jurjaniyya.
From Bukhara to Nakhshab (Nasaf), in desert, thirty farsakhs, over which one encounters a number of ribiits, thence to al-Saghaniyan, a full ten stages.
From al-Saghaniyan to Darzanjl, or to Basand, or Banbab(.?) (Banyab(?)), or Sankardah, one stage in each case.
From al-Saghaniyan to Bilrilb, two post stages;
from al-Saghaniyan to Baham, or Ghashsh, or Zlnwar, three post stages in each case.
From al-Saghaniyan to Hanbiln, two stages; p. 345 and from al-Saghaniyan to al-Khuttal,
thirty farsakhs; and from al-Saghaniyiln to Samarqand, forty farsakhs.
281
THE REGION OF AL-MASHRIQ
p. 346 From Balkh to Khulm, two stages; .
thence to Warwilllz (Walwalij), a like distance; thence to al-Taliqiln, a like distance; thence to Badhakhshiln, seven stages.
From Khulm to Siminjan, two stages; thence to Andaraba, five stages; thence to Kilrbilyah (Jarbayah), three stages; thence to Banjahlr, one stage; thence to Farwan (Barwiln), two stages.
From Balkh to Baghliln, six stages;
and from Samarqand to Baghliln, four stages.
From Balkh to Madhr, six stages; thence to Kilh (Jah), one stage; thence to al-Bilmiyiln, three stages; and from Balkh to Ushforqiln, a like distance; thence to al-Faryab, a like distance; thence to al-Taliqan, a like distance;
From Balkh to Shilwkard (Siyilkird), one stage; thence to Tirmidh, one stage. p. 347 From al-YahOdiyya to al-Qāʿ (the Gulf), one stage; thence to UshfOrqiln, a like distance; thence to al-Sidra, one stage; thence to al-Dastajirdah, one stage; thence to Balkh, one half stage.
From al-YahOdiyya to Qasr al-Amlr, one stage; thence to Faryab, one stage; thence to Karak, one stage; thence to al-Tillaqiln, one stage.
From al-Yahodiyya to Anbar, one stage; thence to a ribilt, one stage; thence to Balkh, one stage.
From Faryilb to Astilna, one stage;
thence to jObln wa-Malln, one stage; thence to Andakhny, one stage; thence to Ribat Afrlghon, one stage;
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
282
thence to Qanl Ghiyath, one stage; thence to KarkO, one stage.
From Marw to Faz, one stage;
thence to Mahdiyy Abadh, one stage; thence to Bahlrabadh, one stage; thence to al-Qarlnayn, one stage; thence to Asadabadh, one stage; or thence to Hawzan, one stage; thence to Qasr Ahnaf, two post stages; thence to Araskan, one stage; thence to al-Asrab, one stage; thence to Kanjabadh, one stage; thence to al-Talaqan, one stage; thence to Kashan, one stage; thence to al-YahOdiyya, one stage.
From Marw to JarOjird, one stage; thence to al-Dandanaqan, one stage; thence to Talastana, one stage; thence to Ushturmaghak, one stage; thence to Sarakhs, one stage.
From Marw to Kushmayhan, one stage; thence to Ribat al-Hadld, one stage; thence to Ribat Nasrak, one stage; thence to Jubb Hammad, one stage; thence to Ribat Baris, one stage; thence to Amul, one stage; thence to the JayhOn, onefarsakh.
From Abshln to Ribat ShOr, one stage; thence to Ribat Shar, one stage; thence to Qaryat al-Qadhl, one stage; thence to ShOrmln, one stage; thence to Qaryat al-Majfls, one stage; thence to Kharah, one stage; thence to Ribat Miyanah, one stage; thence to KarOkh, one stage; thence to Harat, one stage.
From Abshln to Ribat Kurzuwan, one stage; thence to Marazk, one stage;
p. 348
283
THE REGION OF AL-MASHRIQ
thence to Ribilt ROdh, one stage; thence to Marw al-ROdh, one stage; thence to Jisr Har, one stage; thence to al-Tillaqiln, one stage.
From Abshln to Dizah, to Marw al-Rodh, tenfarsakhs.
From Harilt to Asfuzilr, three stages;
and to Millin, or to Karokh or to Bilshiln, one stage in each case.
From Bilshan to Khaysilr, one stage; thence to Astarabyiln, one stage; thence to Milrilbadh, one stage; thence to Awfah (Awbah), one stage; thence to Khasht, one stage; you are then in al-Ghor.
From Harilt to Baban, two stages; thence to Klf, one stage; thence to Baghshor, one stage.
From Ghaznln to Ribat al-Bilrid, one stage; thence to Asnilkh, one stage; thence to Hans, one stage; thence to al-Bamiyan, one stage.
From Ghaznln to Kardlz, one stage; thence to Awigh, one stage; thence to Lajan, and here is a spring of water,
thence to Wayhind, in all, seventeen way stations; you are then in the country of al-Sind and al-Hind.
From Bust to Ribilt Flrozqand, one stage; thence to MayghOn, one stage; thence to Ribat Kishshr, one stage; thence to Banjawily, one stage; thence to Bakrilbildh, one stage; thence to Kharsild, one stage; thence to Ribat Sarab, one stage; thence to Ribilt al-Awqal, one stage; thence to Khinkil Abildh, one stage; thence to Qaryat Gharm, one stage; thence to Qaryat KhilSt, one stage;
p. 349
p. 3so
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
284
thence to Qaryat Juma, one stage; thence to Khāysār, one stage.
From Safanjawi to a ribat, one stage; thence to JankA, one stage; thence to RibAt al-Hajariyya, one stage; thence to BanjawAy, one stage.
From Bust to DAwar, four stages; thence to al-Ghiir, one stage.
From Zaranj to Karkuyah, one stage; thence to Bashtar, one stage; thence to Juwayn, one stage; thence to Bastak, one stage; thence to Kanjar (Kankara), one stage; thence to Sarshak, one stage; thence to WAdi Farah, one stage; thence to Farah, one stage; thence to Darah, one stage; thence to KustAn, one stage; thence to jAshAn, one stage; thence to QanAt Sari, one stage; thence to al-Jabal al-Aswad, one stage; thence to Jaman, one stage; thence to HarAt, one stage.
From Zaranj to ZAnbUq (Zanbiik), one stage; thence to Sarozan, one stage; thence to HarOrA, one stage; thence to Dahhak, one stage; thence to RibAt Karodin, one stage; thence to Ribat Quhistan, one stage; thence to Ribat ʿAbd Allah, one stage; thence to Bust, one stage.
From Zaranj to Juzah (Kuzah), three stages;
thence to Farah, or to al-Qarnln, two stages in each instance;
from Farah to Nih, one stage;
and from Zaranj to al-Taq, one stage;
and from Zaranj to Kishsh, thirty farsakhs.
P. 351 From Qayin to TOn, one stage;
and from Qayin to Bunabid, two stages;
285
THE REGION OF AL-MASHRIQ
thence to Kundur, a like distance;
thence to Turaythlth (Turthlth), two post stages.
From Yunabidh to Sankm (Sanjm), one stage; thence to Jayaman, one stage; thence to Millin Kuwakharz, one stage; thence to Bozjm, two stages; thence to al-Mallilha (saltworks), one stage; thence to the castle, one stage.
From Naysabflr to Blskand, one stage; thence to Husaynabadh, one stage; thence to Khusrojird, one stage;
thence to al-Noq (al-BOq), or to Yahyil Abadh, one stage; thence to Mazlnan and Bahman Abadh, one stage; thence to Asadabildh, one stage; thence to Hafdar, one stage.
From Naysabor to Qasr al-Rlh, one stage; thence to al-Ramada, one stage; thence to Sahah, one stage; thence to MazdOriln, one stage; thence to Oklna, one stage; thence to Sarakhs, one stage.
From Qasr al-Rīh to Farhakird, one stage; thence to Nokdah, one stage; thence to Millaykird, one stage; thence to Bozjm, one stage; thence to Kalnil, one stage; thence to al-Taq(?) [al-Tū?]١ one stage; thence to Amdah, one stage; thence to Harilt, one stage.
From al-Qasr to al-Mallaha, one stage; thence to Sankan, one stage; thence to Yunabidh, two stages.
From Naysabflr to Kalkaw, one stage; thence to al-Dārīn, one stage; thence to Namkhkan, one stage;
and one who wants to get to Nasa should set out for Rīk, a distance ofone stage;
p. 352
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
286
thence to Farukhlln, one stage; thence to Bardar, one stage; thence to Baghdllw, one stage; thence to NasA, one stage.
One who wants to arrive at Ablward may travel to Dazilwand, one stage; thence Huwayrlln, one stage; thence to Qalmlhan, one stage; thence to Ablward, one stage: from Qalmlhan to KOfan is one stage; from KOfan to Ablward is one stage.
From Naysilbiir to Baghlshan, one stage; thence to al-Qaryat al-Hamril’, one stage; thence to al-Mashad, one stage; thence to Tiibarlln, two post stages.
From Naysilbur to Nashdlghan, one stage; thence to a ribiit, one stage; thence to another, one stage; thence to Turaythlth, one stage.
From NaySilbOr to Rlwand, one stage; thence to Mihrajlln, two stages; thence to Isfarilʾln, a like distance.
Here we have given a summary of the distances in this region.
The Region of Al-Daylam (Lowlands and Highlands of Gllan)
p. 353
This is the region of silk and wool; here are skilled craftsmen. Its fruits are carried afar; its cloth is known in Egypt and al-ʿIrāq. Rains are abundant, prices are honest. A delightful metropolis, and the inhabitants have a delightful province. They honour the noble, have mercy on the weak, are eminent in the law, sublime in [knowledge of] the Prophetic tradition. Men in the fight; everyone of them is righteous. Their behaviour is good, they are upright people. Here is a deep river, sentinel cities. Excellent fish are here, fine villages, delicious fruits, all varieties of things. Abundant rice is here, figs, olives, citron, locust trees; there is jujube aplenty, fine grapes; spacious rural districts, fine cities, superb jute; a lofty name, abundant water, large revenue, very fine cloth.
However, we ascribe it to al-Daylam [the family of the Buyids] because their edifices are there, their dominion is there, and thence is their origin. For now they are a people who have taken possession of all the countries adjacent to them; and they comprise the leaders of Islam. The individual and the populace obey them. We did not find a name for this region that would embrace its districts, so we have ascribed it to them [the Buyids], and we have named it from them; so that we may describe in detail its districts, and publish the facts about it. It is not large, and its towns are not large. Were it not that the name of the mountain is correlative and complementary with that of the general area which extends to part of al-Iraq, we should have assigned this region to the latter, making al-Rayy the metropolis thereof, and Qumis one of its sections.
Here is a likeness and representation of it [Map XIII]
We consider the region as five districts, the first of them, from the direction of Khurasan, being Qumis; then Jurjan; then Tabaristan; then al-Daylaman; then al-Khazar. The lake is centrally located in these districts, except for Qumis, for it is high up in the mountains, medially situated between al-Rayy and Khurasan, the district of Tabaristan separating the two districts from the lake.
Qumis is an extensive, delightful district, and the fruits are good. It measures p. 354 eighty by seventy farsakhs, most of it is mountains; towns are few, population is light, there is much grazing livestock, land tax is heavy, the climate is temperate. Its capital is al-Damghan; its towns: Simnān, Bistam, Zaghna, Biyar, MughOn.
Jurjan is a district of plain and mountain, and were it not for the cold, palm trees would be grown there. Here are citrus, olives, jujube, figs. The rivers flow copiously, gardens are many. Here is an important rural district with an abundance of agricultural produce. The river is close by, the metropolis elegant, the name renowned, and the land tax heavy. The name of the capital, and it is the metropolis of the region, is Shahristan. Among its towns: Astarabadh, AʿbaskOn, Alham, Akhur, al-Ribat.
S3٩jni١n^ JdqosissndJd؟SunpsiqBiusuo ،ui١J3g ‘zi.
I؛،5 .SIV UI0Jللو٧قول ٠9 ipjBAqqviعو ٩^ ٩؟tuj3d pu؟ss؟is sqijo U0؟؟٩si؟٩3qioq٩ ٠d 33S) Jgqct :IIIX dew .(/,Ik
289
THE REGION OF AL-DAYLAM
Tabaristiln is a district on a plain, beside the lake; here also are mountains. Rain is abundant. It is a squalid, depressing, dirty, fleasome place. The bread is generally of rice; plenty of fish, garlic, and water fowl. Here are farms of flax and hemp. The capital is Amul, among the towns: Sillus, Mila, Milmatlr, Turunja p. 355 (Burjl), Sllriya, Tamls(a), Harl, Bud, Nllmiya.
Al-Daylamiln is a small district in the mountains. The towns have no elegance, no knowledge, no religion, but there is power, virility, and prestige. Here are remarkable customs, many villages. We have added al-Jil to it, since most people can hardly differentiate between them. The capital of al-Daylam is Barwiln; among its towns are: Willlmir, Shaklraz, Tilrum, Khashm. Al-Jīl has: Dulilb, Baylamiln, Shahr, Kuhan Rodh.
Al-Khazar is an extensive district beyond the lake; a wretched, depressing place. It abounds in grazing animals, honey, and Jews. At its extremity is the rampart of Yiljuj and Mlljuj (Gog and Magog), on its borders the territories of the Romaeans. Two streams are here, most of its towns being on them; they flow into the lake. On its border from the direction ofJurjiln is the mountain of Binqishlah. The capital is Itil; among its towns are: Bulghilr, Samandar, Suwilr, Baghand, Qayshawil, Khamllj, Balanjar, al-Baydhilʾ.
Al-Damghiln is a small capital in a gravelly area; its outskirts have been destroyed. The baths are dirty, the markets not good, and there are not many p. 356 superior people here. Even so, the climate is excellent, and the people are humble. A fortress stands over the town, with three gates-Bilb al-Rayy, Bilb Khurilsiln, Bilb [lacuna in MSS]. There are two markets, a lower and an upper; and a small building as a waqffor the benefit of the caravanserai of Afrilwa and Dihistiln, and for wayfarers. Not much return is derived from it, as those in charge do not increase the rental, as it was bequeathed to them. The mosque, which is in the alleys, is fine and well-kept. The water cisterns are like the cisterns of Marw.
Simniln is on the main road; here is a fine mosque situated in the market; water flows through the market, and tanks in turn are filled from it. Its population has decreased. Before it is the village of Simnilnak, in the direction of al-Rayy: here is a much-frequented market.
Bistilm has a small population, many gardens, fine fruits, a delightful rural district-it is exquisite. The mosque stands as if it were a fortress in the middle of the markets; the town has flowing water.
Mughun: on the road to Khurilsiln and Zaghna; a farming place, excellent fruit.
Biyllr: a town with a fortress, and walls; here are farms and streams; vineyards and fruit. It is famed in the region and in the mountains; the populace has, in Khurilsiln, business and wealth, along with religion, virility, and populousness; in culture they are the leaders, and the stars. The area produces camels, fats, sheep; and here is skill in building and in architecture. Here is chivalry, and philanthropy, and Islilm; and godliness with it in private and public. The women are not seen in the town during the day; and neither songstresses nor drunkards
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
290
are to be found here. No heresy is here that the two sects [Hanafites and SchilfiGtes] notice; and no one, other than the Hanafites, has a jurist here or an ecclesiastical judge. Along with that, the people are renowned in all the lands; and I have personal knowledge, and have heard of their confections known as afrūsha [cake of flour, butter, and honey]. They are the most remarkable in their possessions, and their conversation; prosperous in money, and grazing livestock; famous for their going on the Pilgrimage, and for hospitality.
Nevertheless, they have faults and afflictions. There is no mosque there as in other places; the market and the houses are in the same area, and the sellers are women. The people do not render obedience to the ruler, and water is scarce in the soil and in the gardens. Water is distributed by waterclock, as is the custom at Arrajiln; the most frightful enmity has arisen between the winegrowers and the revenue people, from al-Daylam to the Land of Al-Silmiln. The millstones are below ground, and the water flows down; and its being in the desert is because there is no choice.
The town has two fortifications, between them, the houses. The great house of prayer is within the inner wall, which has one gate, and in the midst of which is a splendid fortress that has been neglected. The outer ring of defence has three gates which are iron-plated, the threshing floors inside the fortification. However, we examined its condition closely, as we do the capitals, because the stock of my mother’s brother is from there; and any person from Qumis that you see in Jerusalem, knows that he is from here! And they used to know my grandfather, Abu al-Tayyib al-Shawil, and they recalled that he traveled to al-Shilm with eighteen men in the days of the Hamriyya [a sect].
Shahrastiln is the metropolis of the region, the capital ofJurjan. Fruits, olive, pomegranates, are plentiful. Among the chief cities of the world it resembles al-Ramla of Palestine. It has glory, splendour, and energetic people with skill, humility, elegance, gentleness, goodness. The markets are fine, as are the places of prayer, the figs; superb are the watermelons, confections, eggplants; yet the bread is kneaded with oil of olives and fats. Here is the bitter orange, citron, jujube; there would be palms, but the cold would mar the dates. The fish are remarkable-they are like steers! It is a prosperous, noble town, with standing and prestige. Here are canals with bridges and arches. Here is the knowledge of God, religion, venerable people, riches. The people have adorned the mosque, and decorated the walls of the houses. The town is in two portions as are Fasa and Baghdad; and it is the custom to have a bench in front of the pulpit. Facing the house of the governor, and reaching to it, is a public square. The call to prayer is made in a chant, and with tunes. The preacher is a Hanafite; and the second call to prayer is made twice. Here is the river, and the rural district of Dihistan; and the town has disappeared in gardens, and trees, and sugarcane. And Khurramarodh, do not forget, for forgetting is the most vexatious thing in science! Here are figs, medlars, pomegranates. There is no exclusion, or expulsion-nor payment of the price for these. The mountains are inhabited,
p. 357
p. 358
291
THE REGION OF AL-DAYLAM
just as in Lebanon. The hostelries are charming, as is Masjid [place of prayer] Dlnllr. This is all true-but now listen! This is a metropolis with withering heat, oppressiveness, flies; and noxious fleas to which we have given the name “bears"! Where the figs grow is mire, and the water is as bad as is possible; and anyone who settles there away from his own country, let him prepare his shroud, for herein is a scythe that mows down the bodies. On the Day of Sacrifice you see them in two groups at the head of the camel; and there is wounding, beating, confusion-the commotion and killing and raging do not separate them. An army is here from al-Daylam, another of Turks of Sllmlln; there is the vilest factionalism on the part of the two sects [Hanafite and Shafiʿite]; devastating partisanship, with even the inventing of a Qurʾān!
Nine roads lead to the town, the first of them Darb Sulaymlln, then Darb al-Qumisiyyln, Darb al-Shāriʿ Hayylln, Darb Kanda, Darb al-Blldinjlln, Darb al-Bllrikllh; and before it Darb Khuraslln. This is what I have well established in the description ofJurjlln.
Bakrllblldh is associated with (Jurjān]-a river with arched bridges is between them: in itself it has the appearance of a populous town. Here are houses of prayer, with elders, nobles; the cemeteries are extensive. The town is across from the metropolis, on a bridged river. Another stream here runs crosswise through the town, called the TayfOrl [Gurgan, Jurjlln], cleaner and sweeter than the other. Here also are wells of sweet water.
Astarabadh has a better climate and healthier water than Jurjlln. Most of the people are weavers of raw silk, and they are experts. Its fortress is in ruin, its ditch flooded. The mosque is in the market, with a stream close to its door.
Abaskon: on the lake; over it a fortress of baked brick. The mosque is in the market, the stream at the edge of the town. It is the port ofJurjlln, the entrepot of al-Rihab.
Harl: on the lake; smaller than AbaskOn, and with smaller population; a skinny people.
Akhur: chief town of the rural district of Dihistlln, on the right side of the road going towards the caravanserai [of Afrawa]. Here is a minaret which may be seen from afar, amidst the villages. In all, there are twenty-four villages in Dihistlln, and it is among the most important districts ofJurjlln.
Al-Ribllt (the caravanserai) is on the edge of the desert. The ruler destroyed its fortress, which used to have three gates. It is populous and well-kept, good p. 359 houses of prayer, magnificent markets, delightful residences, fine foods. No congregational mosque here. The old prayerhouse here has wooden walls, is quite splendid, occupying the lowest portion of the guardhouse, in a place that resembles al-Dandanaqlln. In the middle of that area is a prayerhouse with a minaret, pertaining to the adherents to the Traditions; the remaining prayer-houses belong to the followers of Abu Hanlfa-may God have mercy on him.
Amul is the capital ofTabaristlln: it is a town offame and importance; here are admirable and beautiful clothes. It has the appurtenances of civilization, special
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
292
characteristics, and a hospital; and they have, moreover, two congregational mosques. The old mosque, with the river and trees close by, lies on the edge of the markets; the other is near it. Each mosque is surrounded by porticoes. The river turns the mills, grinding fine. The countenances of the inhabitants are handsome, clean, and graceful; commerce is prosperous, weavers skilled. Its fame is great, the people are merchants; do not ask about the excellence of the fragrance, the fineness of the waists. Their outlook is sharp, with excellence of perception. Garlic makes it fragrant, rice is here in plenty, springs keep the rivers clear. Here is knowledge of God in abundance; nor does it lack a leader, or a person to examine and decide on religious questions.
However, their bread is of com, their other foods repugnant, their faults many. Their bedbugs are astonishing, their depravity great. Their pouring rain lasts a long time; their heat is severe. Their houses are of grass, their habits despicable. Their wheaten bread inebriates, their waterfowl makes one sick. The fleas bite, the house leaks, the weather is harsh. The speech is fast, the town dirty, the market filthy, the summer rainy.
In Salns is a fortress of stone; the mosque beside it.
Sariya is a populous place. The sciences are here; splendid cloths, and markets, and good manners. It is fortified, having also a moat and bridges. A magnificent orange tree is in the mosque; and there are porticoes round about it. Beside the stone bridge is a conspicuous fig tree: observe it carefully so that you may perceive its remarkable qualities and characteristics. I myself inspected it, and they are not frequently seen, as I hope to be saved! p. 360 Barwan is the capital of al-Daylam: small, not prosperous or distinguished, no elegance or nobility here. No fine parks are here, no tall handsome houses. The markets are not extensive, not prosperous; the town is neither large nor attractive. There is no continuous development except in the enclosed villages. However, the people are remarkably patient, and a source of loyal soldiers. The place where the ruler lives is called Shahrastan. A well has been dug at the lowest part of the town, and here also are their wealth and their goods.
In Salarwand is a fortress called Samlriim, on it lions, a sun and moon, of gold. The houses are adobe.
Khashm (Hawsam) is the town of the DaH (missioner). The market is well-frequented, a mosque standing on the edge of the markets. The river flows beside the markets, with a splendid bridge over it; here also is the palace of the ruler. It is a small town, likewise Ti\rum.
Al-Tillaqiln: a large, populous, splendid town, not another like it in the district. It should have been the place where the ruler lives, but I think they disliked the idea because the town is so remote. Here are learned and honourable people, with finesse.
DOlab is the capital of al-Jl.1 the buildings here are of plaster and stone. The mosque is at the edge of the town: a good town with a fine market. In front of the mosque is a plain, beyond which is a point where the streams meet.
293
THE REGION OF AL-DAYLAM
Kuhan ROdh is close to the river. The buildings, some are ofstone, some are wooden huts. The mosque is in the middle of the town.
Moghklln (Mūq:ln): its population has diminished; the town produces little. The remaining towns of al-Jīl are on the littoral.
Itil is a large capital, on a river, flowing into the lake and also called the Itil [Volga River]. To it I add the name of the area on the bank of the river, towards Jurjlln. Around it and in it are trees. There are many Muslims here. Their king was a Jew, who had customs and judges Muslim, Jewish, Christian; and idol-worshippers. I heard that al-Maʾmum invaded them from al-Jurj:lniyya, and overcame them, requiring the king to adopt Islam. Then I heard that an army from the Romaeans, called al-Ros, invaded them and took possession of their country, A wall surrounds the town, the houses are spread out. It is like Jurjlln, or bigger. Their buildings are pavilions of wood and felt, and wooden huts, except for a few that are of clay. The palace of the ruler is of baked brick: it has four portals, one in the direction of the river, and a person crosses to it by boat; another leads to the desert. It is a wretched, barren town, no prosperity, no fruits. Their bread is of corn, the accompaniment, fish.
Bulghllr is in two sections. The buildings here are of wood and reeds. The night is short. The mosque stands in the market, and since they have become Muslims they have been going on raids themselves. The town is on the river Itil, closer to the lake than is the capital.
Suw:lr is on this river. The buildings here are wooden huts; many farms; bread is plentiful.
Khazar is on another river, towards al-Rihllb, and is on just one bank of the river. It is more extensive, more delightful than any we have mentioned. People used to remove from there to the shore of the lake; but now they have returned to the town. They have become Muslims, having been Jews.
Samandar is a large town on the lake between the River ofal-Khazar and B:lb al-Abw:lb. The dwellings are huts. Most of the people are Christians; they are a very humble people, loving the stranger. However, they are robbers. The town is more extensive than Khazar. They have gardens and many vineyards. Their buildings are of wood with reeds interwoven, the roofs fornicate. There are many mosques here.
The lake [Caspian Sea] is deep, dark, and dreary, and traveling on it is harder than on the two seas. It provides nothing useful at all, other than the fish. The boats used here are large, nailed, and covered with pitch. No inhabited island stands in the lake. If a man wished to travel around it he could do so, because the rivers that flow into it are not big, except for Nahr al-Kurr and Nahr al-Malik [Samor]. Some islands in the lake have thickets and swamps and beasts; here also is an island from which much aromatics is derived. The Rampart of YajOj and MajOj is beyond the lake, a distance of about two months' travel.
The Rampart of Dhu al-Qarnayn. I have read in the book of Ibn Khurradiidhbih, and elsewhere, about the story of this rampart, and the accounts
p. 361
p. 362
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
294
all agree. The account cited here and the chain of tradition are those of Ibn Khurradadhbih, because he was the minister of the khalif, and was more likely to have the knowledge of the library of the Amir al-Moʾminin [Commander of the Faithful] entrusted to him. As he says: “Sallam the translator told me: ‘al-Wathiq biʾllah, when he saw in a dream as if the rampart, which Dhu al-Qarnayn (Alexander the Great) had built between us and Yajuj and Majuj, was open, instructed me and said to me, “Inspect it and bring me a report of it." Al-Wathiq had sent Muhammad bin Musa al-Khwarazmi, the astrologer, to Tarkhan, king of al-Khazar; so he gave me fifty men, also fifty thousand dinars, and he gave me money for an indemnity of ten thousand dirhams. He bade me give to each one of the fifty, one thousand dirhams, with provisions for a year, and he gave me two hundred mules to carry the provisions and the water.
“We started out from Samarra with a letter from al-Wathiq to Ishaq bin Ismaʿll, ruler of Armenia-he was in Tiflis-to send us on our way. Ishaq wrote on our behalf to the ruler of al-Sarir, and the ruler of al-Sarir wrote to the king of al-Lan. Then the ruler of al-Lan wrote to the shah of Faylan; then the shah of Faylan wrote to Tarkhan, king of al-Khazar. We stayed with him a day and a night, so that he sent with us fifty guides.
“We traveled away from him for six and twenty days, until we arrived at a black malodorous place: however, before going in there we had been provided p. 363 with vinegar to sniff. We traveled there for twenty days until we arrived at some ruined towns, and we passed among them for seven and twenty days. So we asked about those towns, and were told they were those that Yajuj and Majuj invaded and destroyed. We arrived at some fortresses close to the mountain in a ravine, in a gorge of which the rampart stands; and lo! in those fortresses were a people speaking Arabic and Persian. They were Muslims, who read the Qur>ūn, and had mosques and libraries. They asked us whence we had come, and we informed them that we were messengers of the Amir al-Muʾmini'n [Commander of the Faithful]. So they approached, wondering, and said, ‘Amir al-Mu'mim?' and we said, ‘Yes.' Said they, ‘Is he an elder or a young man?' Said we, ‘A young man'. Said they, ‘Where is he?' Said we, ‘In al-ʿIraq, in a city that is called Samarra.' Said they, ‘We have heard absolutely nothing about this person.'
“We arrived at the mountain, which is smooth; no vegetation on it; and the mountain is there cut by a valley one hundred fifty cubits wide. Here were two sidepillars built fast to the mountain on both sides of the valley, the width ofeach pillar, five and twenty cubits. Visible from below, they were ten cubits, outside the gate. It was all built of iron ingots covered with brass, to a thickness of fifty cubits. The lintel of the gate was of iron, its two ends resting on the pillars: its length, one hundred twenty cubits. It had been inserted into the pillars, in each one to an extent of ten cubits. It was five cubits wide. Over the lintel was a structure in that same ingot of iron covered with brass, extending to the top of the mountain, its height as far as the eye could see. Above that were balconies of iron, at the edge of each balcony two horns, bent, each one towards the other,
295
THE REGION OF AL-DAYLAM
and between the horns was a door of iron consisting of two leaves, closed; the width of each leaf was fifty cubits, its height fifty cubits, its thickness five cubits. The two pillars of both leaves were set in the lintel up to its full measure. On the door was a bolt seven cubits long, one fathom in girth, and the height of the bolt above the ground was five and twenty cubits. Above the bolt, at a distance of five cubits was a lock, of a greater length than the length of the bolt-the tongue of p. 364 each one was two cubits long-and on the lock hung a key. The length of the key was a cubit and a half, and it had twelve teeth, each tooth skillfully made, and bigger than could be taken from a mould. The key hung from a chain eight cubits long, in thickness, four spans; and the ring in which the chain was set was like the ring of a catapult. The threshold of the door was ten cubits thick, by one hundred cubits together with what was under the two pillars; [its thickness] was visible for five cubits. All these measurements are in units of the standard cubit.
“The superintendent ofthose forts rides out every Friday with ten horsemen, every horseman having an iron mallet, each one weighing fifty manns [mann = weight of two ratls]. They strike the bolt with those mallets, each man striking three times, so that whoever is behind the door will hear the sound and know that the guardians are there; and these will know that those have done no damage to the door. When our company struck the bolt they put their ears set to listen, and lo! the reverberation was there.
“Close to this place is a huge fort about tenfarsakhs in each dimension; at the gate are two guardhouses, the width of each one, two hundred cubits. At the door of each of these two guardhouses are two trees, and between the guardhouses is a well of sweet water. In one of the guardhouses is the building equipment with which the rampart was built. Here were iron caldrons and ladles, four caldrons by each tripod, like the caldrons for soapmaking. The remainder of the iron ingots were there, stuck one to the other with rust.
“We asked there if they had seen anyone from YajOj and MajOj and they said they had once seen a number of them above the balconies; but a dark wind arose and cast them down on their own side, they said. And the height of a man of p. 365 them, as they saw with their own eyes, was a span and one halfl
“Then the guides departed with us for the area of Khurasan, and we emerged seven farsakhs beyond Samarqand. Those in charge of the fortresses had given us provisions, as much as we needed. Eventually we reached al-Wathiq, and gave him the report.'" And this contradicts the report of anyone who should assert that the rampart is in al-Andalus.
A Summary Account of Conditions in this Region This region is hot except for Qumis; here is water and rain aplenty. It has no stream in which boats travel except in the area ofal-Khazar. The worst water and climate is in Jurjan, rough and noxious. There are many dhimmi. The palm is not cultivated here.
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
296
The sects here are varied. Qumis, most of the people ofJurjiln, and some of those of Tabaristiln are Hanafites, the remainder Hanbalites and Shilfiʿites. You do not see in Biyilr followers of the Tradition, except Shilfiʿites. There are many Najjilriyya in Jurjiln. The Karrilmites in Jurjiln, Biyilr and the mountains of Tabaristiln have retreat houses. The Shiʿa are in evidence in Jurjiln and Tabaristiln.
Now should someone say: “Did you not say that in Biyilr are no heretics; and then say that the Karrilmites are there," it would be said to him that the Karrilmites are a people of asceticism and piety, relying on the authority of AbO Hanifa.
Now, anybody who appeals to the authority ofAbO Hanlfa, or that ofMillik, or of al-ShiifiʿI, or to the People of the Tradition, without exaggerating in it, or being extreme on the side of Mu(jiwiya, and also who did not liken God to and give Him attributes ofcreated beings-he is not a heretic. And I am determined that I will not let my tongue wag about the people of Muhammad-God's peace and blessings be upon him-nor will I give witness against them as heretics as far as I find a way to avoid this. I am so inclined after hearing this beautiful and noble tradition: Muhammad bin Muhammad al-Dihistilni related to me, as did also Musilfir bin ʿAbd Allilh al-Istarilbiidhl, Muhammad bin ʿAll al-NahawI, ʿAll ibn al-Hasan al-SarakhsI, who had been informed by YOsufbin ʿAll al-Faqlh al-Zilhid, who had been informed by Abu al-Walid Ahmad bin Bistilm al-Tiilaqilnl al-Faqlh al-Zilhid, who had been informed by Yosuf bin ʿAll al-Abbilr al-Samarqandl, who had been informed by ʿAll bin Ishilq al-Hanzall, who had been informed by Bashar bin ʿlmilra, who said that Misʿar bin Kidilm had said: “I have known no person whatever who had an intelligence like the intelligence of Ibn Murra. A man came to him and said, ‘God save you! I have come to you asking for guidance. I am a man who has joined all of these sects, and nothing admitted me to any sect of them unless the Quriin admitted me to it. And I was not ousted from a sect unless that the Quriin ousted me from it; so that I am left behind, and nothing is available to me.' Said ʿAmr bin Murra to him: ‘Do you swear by Allilh, who is the only God, that you came for guidance?' Said [the other], ‘I swear by Allilh, and there is no God except Him, that I have come seeking guidance.' Said ʿAmr, ‘Very well! Have you noticed whether [the sects] disagreed in that Muhammad is the Messenger of God, and that what he brought from God is truth?' Said he, ‘No.' Said ʿAmr: ‘And did they disagree concerning the Quriin, that it is the book of God?' Said he, ‘No.' Said ʿAmr: ‘And did they disagree over the religion of God, that it is Islilm?' Said he, ‘No.' Said ʿAmr: ‘And did they disagree over the Kaʿba, that it is the Qibla?' Said he, ‘No.' Said ʿAmr: ‘And did they disagree in the matter of prayers, that there are five?' Said he, ‘No.' Said ʿAmr: ‘And did they disagree about Ramadhiln, that it is their month in which they fast?' Said he, ‘No.' Said ʿAmr: ‘And did they disagree in the matter of the Pilgrimage, that it is the house of God to which they make the Pilgrimage?' Said he, ‘No.' Said ʿAmr: ‘And did they disagree in
p. 366
297
THE REGION OF AL-DAYLAM
the matter of the alms tax, that it is, from every two hundred, five dirhams? Said he, ‘No.' Said ʿAmr: ‘And did they disagree in the washing away of ritual impurity, that it is obligatory?' Said he, ‘No.' So ʿAmr referred to this, and more like it, and then recited: ‘He it is who has sent down the Book to you, from which there are lucid verses that are the essence of the Book, while others are figurative.' (Quriin, sOra 3, verse 7). Said ʿAmr: ‘And do you know what a lucid verse is?' Said he, ‘No.' Said ʿAmr: ‘The lucid verse is one on which there is agreement, and the figurative one, one on which there has been disagreement. Strengthen your intention in the lucid verses, and beware of searching the figurative.' Said the man, ‘Praise be to God who has directed me to your presence; for I arise from before you, in very good condition!' And he invoked God's blessing on him and extolled him. Said ʿAmr: ‘If the ruler were to invite the people of the book [Christians and Jews] to meet him, and they were to respond, and if he were to submit to them those matters that you have learned; then if he were to challenge you as he would challenge them, and he were to exchange with you on the matters he submitted to them, then make use of the foremost commandment! If someone should ask what the foremost commandment is, it is that on which our predecessors have agreed.' "
May God be merciful to the worshipper who ponders this story, and adheres to one of the four madhahib that comprise the vast majority of people, and who restrains his tongue from cutting the Muslims to pieces, and from extravagance in the faith.
One day I attended the council of al-Qadhl al-Mukhtar, and he is the greatest Imam I have ever met, the most intelligent, the most religious of them. Mention was made there of the controversy among the people [of Muhammad], and the fanaticism of the people of the sects. So he pointed with his hand to the Qjbla and said, “Who pray towards this Qjbla are indeed our brothers, the Muslims.'' And I saw Abo Zayd al-Marozi, and he was a religious Imam, saying the witr prayers with three units, and also following the school of Abo Hanifa in a number of other matters. Moreover, I heard AbO al-Tayyib bin Ahmad say, “Every one of them considered the cases with independent judgment, and every one of them is considered correct."
You should realize that this fanaticism you see, only the ignorant and exaggerators among the storytellers, and others, stir it up; but the [Prophet's] community is as I have told you.
The districts of al-Daylam are Shiʿa; most of the people of al-Jīl are Sunni.
Most of the goods that come from this region are specialties. Qumis produces white decorated cotton scarves, small and large; also plain ones, and cushions. Sometimes a scarf from there is worth two thousand dirhams. They also produce dresses, taylasiins, and fine wool clothing. The people of Jurjan produce silk veils that are sent to al-Yaman, also jujubes; they produce inferior brocade, figs and olives. From Tabaristan come dresses that are preferred over those of Fars; taylasiins; and canvas clothing that is carried to distant places-much of it is sold
p. 367
298 THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS in Makka. Some of it is cheap, some is expensive, and is called in the West, al-Makkiyya [Makkan]. They also produce bands of cloth. From Biyar come cloth, and much oil. They have a special competence here in the making of clay, so you do not see an important person, or a scholar, without skill in this art. Abu al-Tayyib al-Shawa, with his wealth and his dignity, you would always see him in his villages building a hut or raising a wall, likewise his sons and grandsons-they have the engineering and the skill in constructing a building without having studied specially for it. I have never seen finer construction than that of the houses of Biyar; for they have truly fashioned them with form, and increased their appurtenances of convenience.
The waters of this region: rivers flow down from the mountains; and there is the river of Jurjan-the Tayfiirl—and another. The river [lacuna in MS] [Asbidrodh?] is in al-Daylam, and many streams flow into it; it flows into the lak^ The river Itil emerges from the direction of the dam, while the waters of al-Jīl flow down from the mountains ofal-Daylam; and the waters ofTabaristan from the mountains, or from Khurramarodh.
Places of interest here. Ribat Dihistan which people from Khurasan make a point of destination-it is splendid, exquisite. At a distance of a day's journey from Bistam is a place which people visit, for here are the pious associates of the mosque, [devoted to study and prayer]. Within sight of Bistam is the grave of AbO Yazld; and in districts of al-Khazar are some distinguished guardhouses.
Among the remarkable things is a small creature in Tabaristan, with one thousand legs; it is smaller than the locust, thinner than the worm; when it moves-well think of it as ripples appearing on clusters of grapes. There is another small animal, with two wings like the wings of a swallow; it is the size of a fox, and gnaws fruit. Here also are fish that look like a piece of sycamore; one day as I passed through the fish market in Jurjan, I saw a head the size of the head of a bull, and was told that it was the head of a fish. In the area of Jurjan is a well in which a tree appears every year, then disappears. One of the rulers tried to tie it with heavy chains, but it tore them and broke them, and disappeared.
The languages of Qumis and Jurjan are close to each other. They use the hāʾ[h], saying hādih, and hākun—there is a certain charm to it. The language of Tabaristan is close to this, except that there is a rapidity about it. The language of al-Daylam, by contrast, is incomprehensible. In al-Jīl they use the khāʾ. The language of al-Khazar is forceful and incomprehensible.
p. 368
The features of the people of Qumis are attractive. The people of al-Daylam have handsome beards and faces; they are elegant. The people of Jurjan are
299
THE REGION OF AL-DAYLAM
skinny, the people ofTabaristān are good-looking and pure. Among the people of al-Khazar are similarities to the Slavs.
Most of the names of the people ofJurjan are AbO Sadiq, and Abu al-Rabīʿ; and AbO Naʿlm; for the people of Tabaristan it is AbO Hamid.
Manners and customs. In Jurjan the preaching is by the jurists, and by the storytellers. People do not usually wear the taylasan. In al-Daylam, they have remarkable customs. They marry none but their own people; and one day I was in one of the hostelries when a young girl rushed past, a man with his sword unsheathed dashing after her, trying to kill her. I asked what she had done to merit her killing. Said my informant, “She married outside our people; and killing anyone who does that is an obligation with us." On the occasion of a funeral, people uncover their heads and assemble; then the mourners and the bereaved wind themselves in raiment which they wrap around their heads and beards. They hold councils in the streets. Their markets are on high ground, and they assemble there with javelins in their hands, wearing cloaks made in Tabaristan. The learned men they call “teacher", and sometimes they got hold ofme and said, “Lauk muaHlim" [teacher], and “lauk" means “outstanding one." They are not accustomed to selling bread, and they despise begging; for the stranger need only go to their houses and help himself to food to satisfy his needs. Markets are held on Friday, on a stretch of level ground, and every village has its day in turn. When they finish, the men and women retreat to a secluded place where they wrestle with one another; a man sits there with a rope, and any one who wins he ties a knot for him. Ifa man likes a woman he goes with her, and her family accepts him with joy and welcoming, and they boast to one another over him since he is willing to accept their hospitality. They entertain him for three days, then the public crier makes an announcement, after he has been with her for a week in an isolated building. Meantime her people meet and plan. I asked Abu Nabita al-Ans:lrI; “Does he possess her before the contract?" Said he, “If they knew of such a thing they would kill him." Many times I attended the marriage ceremonies of the people ofBiyar. The people gather after darkness, every man with a long-necked bottle of rosewater, and firing, which is lighted at the door of the bridegroom and bride. One of the elders delivers an eloquent speech, in which he makes requests of the couple; he then makes requests of the woman, and another person from the side of the bride answers him in a speech, with a pleasant response-most of the speakers are well-bred people. They then make the contract, and the men with the jars begin to sprinkle the walls with them; whereupon each jarowner is given a dish of afrriha, and you never in all this world will see the like of their afrasha] I have heard that one of the kings summoned a man from there who excelled in making this pastry, and he made it with flour of their flour, some of their oil, and their syrup, and a woman made some, but it was not like what is made in Biyar. I saw a man
p. 369
p. 370
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
300
who took some of it to Makka, brought it back, and it had not undergone any change.
I spent four months accepting their invitations and attending their weddings, and I never saw them enlarging on a menu of broth, then boned meat, then rice, then iifrūsha made with dates.
If snow falls there they turn the stream into the streets, so the waters clear away all the snow and wash the alleys. You do not see a woman during the day, they go out at night only, in black dress. A woman whose husband has died does not marry: if she does, the youngsters throw potsherds at her door.
The water of Jurjiln is deadly to strangers. In Tabaristiln is a fish noxious to man, and a bird the flesh of which is bad.
Al-Daylam [the Buyid dynasty] has the sovereignty; and war breaks out in Jurjiln between them and the ruler of Khurilsiln.
Addition/version MS. c.
Government: al-Daylam is under control of a people of two main families, the Sallilrwand and the Bildharwand. As to the Sallilrwand, they are from the direction of Adharbayjan and they gained mastery over those areas; and the other family is here. In this region there is good administration, steadfastness, preparedness, spaciousness, peace. And for the people of al-Jll, they obey only the sons of the Daʿ! [missioner] whose stock is from Saʿda: there are two daʿls, distinguished as “the First” and “the Second”. As for the towns of al-Khazar, sometimes the ruler of al-Jurjil.niyya conquered them; and as for Jurjil.n and Tabaristil.n, these provinces at times the house of al-Daylam ruled, and alternately, at times the armies of the king of al-Mashriq subdued them.
p. 371 The land-tax of Qumis is one thousand thousand and one hundred thousand and ninety-six thousand dirhams. The land tax ofjurjiln is ten thousand thousand and one hundred thousand and ninety-six thousand, eight hundred dirhams. The land tax ofBiyilr was six and twenty thousand dirhams; so a man went from there to Bukhilril, and built a house of very fine clay. Then he brought it on the necks of some men and set it before the prince, Nasr bin Ahmad, and he wondered at it. He said to him: “Ask what you want." Said he, “Return our land taxes to six thousand, and attach our administrative offices to Naysilbor;" and today it is one of the administrative districts of Naysilbiir. Do you not notice that between it and Naysilbiir is a village the land tax of which goes to Qumis? Do you not notice that they call the people of Biyilr “Qumisites"?
There is factionalism in Jurjan, for between the school [of AbO Hanlfa] and the Bakrilwadhiyya there is murder over the head of the sacrificial camel. On the day of the Festival [sacrifice], between the followers of Hasan and the Karrilmites, frightful fighting, and the most amazing partisan strife break out.
301
THE REGION OF AL-DAYLAM
The people ofTabaristAn have three characteristics for which there are three bases: fragrance of breath from eating garlic, keenness and excellence of vision from eating vegetables, and fineness of waist from eating rice.
The distances in this region:
From al-Dilmghlln to al-Haddllda, one stage; thence to Badash, one stage; thence to Murjlln, one stage; thence to Hafdar, one stage; thence to Asadllwlldh, one stage. p. 372 From al-Dllmghlln to Jarmjuwl, one stage; thence to Ribllt ʿllyābādh, one stage; thence to Simnlln, one stage; thence to Raʾs al-Kalb, one stage; thence to Qaryat al-Milh, one stage; thence to Khwllr al-Rayy, one stage.
From al-Haddllda to Bistilm, one stage; thence to Qarya. ..., one stage; thence to Zardllblldh, one stage; thence to Khurramllrodh, one stage; thence to Juhayna, one stage; thence to Jurjlln, one stage.
From Zardllblldh ..., one stage;
... to Qarya ... one stage;
thence to al-Qubab, one stage;
thence to Biyllr to al-Hawdh, one stage;
thence to Asadllwlldh, one stage,
and from there to Turthlth, thirty farsakhs.
From Biyllr to al-Dilmghlln, through the desert, twenty-five farsakhs.
From Jurjlln to Dlnllzllrll, one stage; thence to Amlntll, one stage; thence to Ajagh, one stage; thence to Sibdllst, one stage; thence to Isfarllʿin, one stage.
From there to Abasknn, or to Ribllt Hafs, or to Ribllat ʿAli, one stage in every instance.
302 THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
From Ribat (All to Ribat al-Amlr, one stage; thence to Bllamak, one stage; thence to Ribat Dihistan, one stage; and Akhur is here.
From Amul to Bular, one stage; thence to Ask, one stage; thence to Bamhir (Namahand), one stage; thence to Barziyan, one stage; thence to al-Rayy, one stage.
From Amul to Mamatir, one stage; thence to Sariya, one stage.
From Amul to Turunja (Burjl), one stage; thence to Raʾs al-Hadd, three stages.
From Sariya to Abarast, one stage; thence to Abadan, one stage; thence to Tamis(a), one stage; thence to Astarabadh, one stage; thence to Jurjan, two stages.
From Jurjan to al-Daylaman, twelve stages; thence to Ardabil, a like distance.
From Abaskan to Astarabadh, one stage; thence to Sariya, four stages.
From Amul to Natil, one stage; thence to Salas, one stage; thence to Kalar, one stage; thence to the mountains of al-Daylam, one stage.
From Salas to Isbldradh, one stage; thence to Qaryat al-Rasad, one stage; thence to Khashm, one stage; thence to Baylaman, four stages; thence to al-Dalab, four stages; thence to Kuhan Radh, three stages; thence to Maghkan, two stages; thence to [the river] al-Kurr, a like distance; thence to Hashtadhar, a like distance; thence to al-Shamakhiya, a like distance.
p. 373
The Region ofAl-Rihab (Adharbajjan—Armenia)
Since this is an illustrious and delightful region, fruits and grapes have multiplied there, its towns among the most pleasant, as Kamoqan and Khilat, and Tabriz, which resemble al-ʿIraq; prices have been low there, the trees intertwined, the streams flow through it; it contains mountains and honey, plains and provinces; in its wadis are sheep, and since we did not find a general name for it that would embrace its districts, we have called it al-Rihab [the spacious]. It is a region of Islilm; within it are camels, and here the Romaeans blockade the Muslims. Sturdy wools are produced here, superb surcingles usually dyed crimson-I really fail in describing it. The price of a lamb is two dirhams, and the bread two loaves for a diinaq. The fruits cannot be counted nor weighed. Along with that it is an important frontier, an exalted region. Here were those who controlled the Aras River (al-Rass) below the mountains Huwayrith and Hitrith [Ararat]. Here is a portion of al-Ta'if, it looks like Paradise! It is a glory to Islam, an area that invites invaders. Here is profitable commerce, ancient districts, copiously flowing rivers, delightful villages, admirable qualities, delicious fruits. The people are Sunni Muslims, eloquent and prestigious. They have honeydew, madder, p. 374 and jasmine, the excellent qasbūya fish, the sea, the lakes: the gateway and the guardhouses, the religion, the products. However, everyone in his sect is a fanatic, and along with that they are disagreeable. In their speech is dissimulation, and in them, conceit. The roads thither are difficult, and the Christians there have a majority. Here is a representation and an image of it. [Map XIV]
We consider this region as comprising three districts. The first one, from the direction of the lake, is al-Ran, then Armlniya, then Adharbayjan.
Al-Ran constitutes about one-third of the region. It is like an island, between the lake and the River al-Rass. The River al-Malik cuts through its length. Its capital is Bardhaʿa, and among its towns are Tiflis, al-Qalʿa١ Khunan, Shamkor, Janza, Bardij, al-Shamakhiya, Shirwan, Bakoh, al-Shabaran, Bab al-Abwab, al-Abkhan (Abkhaz), Qabala, Shakki, Malazkird, Tabla.
Arminiya is an important district. It was set out by Armina bin Kanzar bin Yafath bin Noah. From here come curtains, very fine fringed cloths, and many special items. Its capital is Dabil, and among its towns are Bidlls, Khilat, Arjlsh, Barkarl, KhOy, Salamas, Urmiya, Dakharraqan, Maragha, Ahr, Marand, Sanjiln, Qaliqala, Qandariya, Qalʿat Yonus, Norin. p. 375 Adharbayjan is a district laid out by Adhrabadh bin BiyOrasaf bin al-Aswad bin Sitm bin Noahten whom be peace. Its capital, and it is the metropolis ofthe region, is Ardabll. A mountain is here which has a dimension of one hundred fortyfarsakhs, all ofit villages and farms. It is said that there are seventy languages spoken here. The agricultural products of Ardabil are many. Most of the houses
ssn3J٥؟٠3un١i3jqBjU3U0 ‘uqjog ‘zjjsaqjnqn^ J3qos قل0للأ ٠sw 09 jpjBAqqv—s laSuaidsعو q^ ٩؟uij3d pu؟ss؟0 U0و is aqj؟؟qsj؟١q؟٩3qjo B٩JB٩PY :aix df^؛؟٠d 33S) U 8lk).
n
3 لا0103لآةHL AO 30٥3٦^0N^ د0لا SNOISIAia LS3H 3HL	toe
305
THE REGION OF AL-RIHAB
are under the ground. Among its towns are: Rasba, Tabriz, Jabirwan, Khnnaj, al-Miyanij, al-Sarat, Barwa, Warthan, Mnqan, Mlmadh, Barzand.
Should someone assert that Bidlls pertains to the region of AqOr and conclude that it was among the administrative areas of Bani Hamdan, I should reply that it is as the people of both regions have claimed it to be. We consider it part of this region because we have found a correspondence to the name, and that is “Tiflis." In any case the administrative districts are not a proof in this matter. Do you not realize that Sayf al-Dawla had Qnnasrln and al-Raqqa؛ but no one claimed that al-Raqqa pertained to al-Sham.
Bardhaʿa is the capital, large, quadrangular; on level ground, it has a fortress, and is affluent. Its markets are close together and shaded; the mosque is in the market. It is the Baghdad of this region. The houses are delightful, ofburnt brick and plaster, good, handsome; there are fruits aplenty. Some of the pillars of the mosque are of plaster and baked brick, and some are ofwood. A river flows through the town, and the River al-Kurr is about two farsakhs away. Streams flow fairly close to here. It is a pleasant town; however, its outskirts have been laid waste, its population thinned, and its fortress fallen into ruin. Addition/version MS. c.
[The mosque] is built on tall pillars covered with gypsum; though some of them are made of wood of variegated grain. The town has a stream that runs by all the main thoroughfares, and flows in four directions. Good things are there aplenty and in superabundance, and a richness of excellent fruits. It is the Baghdad in its entirety of al-Rihab. The dwellings are splendid, the yards of the houses spacious; low prices are constant, there is no heresy here. The River Kurr flows at a distance of a post stage from the city, which is itself situated between the two streams and the shimmering lake. What a pleasant, clean, and diversified place, were it not for a shortcoming; and if you wish to you may listen. Its outlying areas are in ruins such as Baylaʿa; its population has diminished, and the ruler is voracious. It is out-of-the-way, and unknown far away, and without much significance. Few are their jurisprudents who follow the school of Hanbal; the fortress has fallen into ruin, and the roads have disappeared. This is the description of the market of al-RAn of Bardhaʿa, a description candid and accepted; a gift to an eminent shaykh, and which I have thrown in for the sake of rhyming prose.
Tiflls is a fortified town close to the mountains. The river al-Kurr flows p. 376 through it, so it consists of two parts with a bridge between. Its walls are built of stone, then timber laid on that.
Al-Qalaʿ (Qalaʿt Ibn Kandaman) is a town without a fort; on level ground not far from the mountain Lakzan.
Al-Shamakhiya: at the base of the mountain; the buildings are of stone and plaster; here are running water, orchards and parks.
Shirwan: a large town on level ground; the buildings are of stone. The mosque stands in the markets; a stream flows through the town.
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
306
Mughkan is at the border. It used to be quite populous, but now its population is light. It is on the main road.
Bakuh: on the lake; one of the ports of the region.
Shabaran: without a fortress; most of the people are Christians from the boundary area.
Qabala: fortified; the river outside the town, the mosque some distance away, on a hill.
Shakki: on level ground; most of the people Christians; the mosque in the market of the Muslims.
Warthan: on level ground, well developed; its market beyond the river, the mosque separated from it.
Baylaqan: small; its people are faultless. The sweetmeat produced here is famous.
Malazkird: fortified; a number of mosques; many gardens; the mosque on the edge of the market.
Tabla is under the control of the Muslims; here are five hundred houses. Most of the people here are Christians; an attractive town.
Al-Abkhan (al-Abkhaz): delightful, and similarly the towns of this district. Qaryat Yunus is the village of al-Dirani: Muslims here.
Bab al-Abwab (Darband) is on Bahr al-Khazar (the Caspian Sea). It is fortified by the wall which separates it from al-Khazar. It has three gates-Bab al-Kabir (the big gate), Bab al-Saghir (the small gate), and another towards the sea: this gate is closed and is never opened. There are a number of gates also towards the sea, and pre-dating Islam. The wall has been extended from the mountain, well into the lake, towers on it, wherein are houses of prayer, and sentinels. The mosque is in the middle of the markets, in it a spring of water. The buildings are of stone, the houses attractive. Running water is here.
Dabll is an important town with a fortress, well fortified. It has many products, its name is famous. Its wool is important, its river fluent; gardens surround it, and it has ancient suburbs, a strong fortress. Its markets are cruciform, its fertility amazing. The mosque is on a large hill, beside which is a church which the Kurds control; in it is a fortress. The buildings are of clay and stone. It has a number of gates, among them Bab Kldar (Kiran), Bab Tiflls, Bab Ani. However, despite its distinction, the majority of the inhabitants are Christian, for its population has declined and its fortress gone to ruin.
Bidlis: in a deep wadi in which two streams flow, meeting in the town. It has two sides to it: in it a fortress of stone, reddish like the sunset.
Akhlat (Khilat) is a town on the level ground; here are delightful gardens; over it a fortress of adobe. The mosque is in the markets; a stream flows through the town.
Salamas, very good; a fortress over it of adobe and stone. A copiously flowing stream is here. The mosque stands on the edge of the market. The Kurds have built a wall around it.
p. 377
307
THE REGION OF AL-RIHAB
Urmiya: an attractive town; a citadel here; the town is populous. The mosque is in the clothmakers' market. The town has a stronghold, a stream.
Maragha: splendid; has a fortress and a citadel; suburbs; the forts are of clay.
Marand: fortified; gardens surround it; here are populous suburbs; the mosque is in the markets.
Qandariya: a town which the Kurds established; a delightful mosque here.
NUrln is fortified; has a citadel. At the door of the mosque is a spring of water. Gardens are many; agreeable.
Qalaʿt Yonus: the town of al-Dirani; here are Muslims.
Ardabll is the capital of Adharbayjan, and the metropolis of the region; a strong fortress stands over it. It is smaller than Dabil. Its markets are cross shaped, being at the meeting of four roads, and the mosque is at the middle of the cross, on high ground behind the fortress. The suburbs are populous. Most of the buildings are of clay. There are many balconies, much fruit, and filth. Here is p. 378 running water, a standing mercenary army, abundance of agricultural produce, good baths. However they are a miserly, disagreeable populace, with few scholars. The town is horrible, stinking; one of the latrines of the world. They are a people of cunning and stupidity, never considering consequences; neither do they ever make allowances for sects other than their own. Their preacher is not a jurist, their leader not distinguished, their counselor not cultured, their physician not skillful.
Tabrizalo you realize what Tabriz is! It is gold, pure gold; powerful alchemy, impregnable town. It is preferred over the City of Peace [Baghdad], and the followers of Islam are proud of it. Streams flow through, the trees sway on its land. Do not ask about the low prices, the abundance of fruits. The mosque is in the middle of the town. There is no limit to its goodness!
Mughan: a town which two rivers surround. Around it are delightful gardens, it is like Paradise in its spaciousness. With Tabriz it makes up two parks, with al-Rihab two glories of Islam. It is situated between Ardabll and Jllan; from it to Bardha'a is a distance of eight [faarsakhs]. It has good worthwhile arable land; two streams flow there. The leading people are like pearls, like coral; they are generous and noble-hearted.
Barzand: small; the market of the Armenians, the port of the district; a good profitable place.
Miyana: small; on level ground; many products.
Zanjan: at the boundary; it has fallen into ruin. There is a stream here, also the main road.
All the towns of this region are good, agricultural products are plentiful; here are low prices, fruits, meats, blessings and goodness.
A Summary Account of Conditions in this Region This is a cold region, with much snow and rain, a certain degree of distastefulness, but the people are colder and more distasteful. They have big beards,
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
308
their speech is not attractive. In Arminiya they speak Armenian, in al-Ran, Rilnian; their Persian is understandable, and is close to Khurilsilnian in sound. Their sects are harmonious. However, the followers of the Tradition there are Hanbalites; the majority in Dabll are followers of Abu Hanlfa-may God have mercy upon him-and these are to be found in some towns, without being a majority. One day I was at the council of Abu ʿAmr al-Khuwal listening to the Traditions, and he said, “Let us have a question." There was a companion with me, and we asked a question about a gift of property held in common, and we spoke on the matter for a long time until we wearied of it. Then a middle-aged man began to speak there, and spoke eloquently on the question. When the talking stopped I said: “How able you are! But you have exaggerated." And I pointed out what I disagreed with him on. Said he, “I do not belong to your school." Said I, “How is it your people do not give more attention to what you have alleged, since it is a question that has been quite difficult for us?" Said he, “What I have maintained is from the words of the judge Abu Nasr bin Sahl, the arbitrator of Khurasan, for many times have I argued it with him." They do not expound scholastic theology nor do they take sides in such matters.
There was in Dabll a cloister where the residents followed the lore of mysticism with the minimum of spirituality. One day I attended the council of Abo [lacuna in MSS.] from Ardabll: it was packed with people standing and sitting, asking him questions about social interrelations. Said I, “What do you say-God preserve you!-about a man who had a conscience that guided him; suppose it were lost to him, where should he seek to recover it?" Said he, “Let him return to the original source where he obtained it, and let him have resort to that." Said I, “But circumstances have changed between him and the source." Said he, “Let him ask the original source to obtain it." “But," said I, “he no longer has any standing with the original source so that he could make a request." Said he, “He should knock at the door until it is opened to him, and he should shout in the darkness of the night until mercy is shown him."
The rivers that are well-known here are three: Nahr al-Rass, Nahr al-Malik, and Nahr al-Kurr which has the lightest water of them all. This last emerges from the mountain district at the borders ofJanza and Shamkur close to Tiflis, then flows through the land ofthe heathens. Close to it in sweetness and lightness is Nahr al-Rass, which flows extending along the border of al-Ran. It comes out from Arminiya, flowing until it reaches Warthan, then it eventually flows beyond Moqan, and flows into the [Caspian] sea. Nahr al-Malik comes out from the country of the Romaeans, beyond the district of al-Ran; it eventually flows into the sea. Only the Bahr al-Khazar [Caspian Sea] touches this region. In this region are two lakes, one of them in Urmiya, its length about four days' journey, riding; it may be crossed by boat in a day and a night. The other is in Arminiya, and is known as Lake Arjlj [recte Arjlsh = Van].
p. 379
p. 380
309
THE REGION OF AL-RIHAB
The commerce here. Bardhaʿa produces much silk; Bab al-Abwab cotton cloth, slaves, saffron, the finest mules; Dabll cloth and rugs of wool, cushions and the like, very fine surcingles. From Bardhaʿa also curtains; very fine mules are brought there, and in Bardhaʿa, on the first day of the week is a market called al-Kurkl. The people of the district, and of the areas around assemble there. In fact they say there Yawm al-Sabt [Saturday], Yawm al-Kurkl [instead of Yawm al-Ahad = Sunday], Yawm al-Ithnayn [Monday]. Silk and cloth are sold there. Nothing compares with their surcingles, their fringed quilts, their crimson [cloths] and such things, their dyes, the fruit called al-zūqāl) the qasbūya [fish] and a fish that is called al-tarrikh. Here are figs, sheep, and acorns of the very finest quality.
Among the remarkable things of Bab al-Abwab is a fortification of the kind we mentioned for Tyre and Acre; it is guarded by a chain built into the rock with mortar and lead. In Tiflls are baths such as we mentioned for Tabariyya (Tiberias), without heat. Jabal al-Harith is high over the realm of al-Islam: no one can climb it. It is said to be, with Jabal al-Huwayrith, one of the mountains of al-Ta'if, and that on Nahr al-Rass were a thousand towns which are now underneath both of those mountains. In the mosque of Ardabll is a large stone, which even if struck with bars of iron is not affected. It fell from the sky some distance from the town, and was then brought to the mosque. I heard Zarlf the eunuch say while we were traveling near Ardabll, that lo! something was coming down from the sky like a huge shield, and it fell to the ground. There was a stone in it, and it could possibly be this; it is like the burnisher used by the dyers, with two thin edges. A post stage from Muqan is a large fort called al-Hasra, above p. 381 it houses and castles in which is much gold, pictures of birds and wild beasts. A number of rulers have tried to control it, but they were unable to get up to it. Three farsakhs from Dabll is a white monastery of stone carved out like a capuche; inside is a picture ofMaryam (Mary) on eight pillars between which are doors; by whichever door you enter you see the picture of Maryam. Nearby is a black rock the sweat ofwhich is an oil wherewith people seek to be cured. Nearby is found the qimiz, an insect that appears in the ground. The women come out and dig it up with a piece of copper they carry with them, and bake it in the oven. In the rural districts of Ardabll the people plough with eight oxen and four drivers, one driver to each pair of oxen. I asked them if this is because of the hardness of the ground. They said no, but that it is because of the ice.
The mann of Ardabll is one thousand two hundred; the ratl of KhOy is three hundred and their mann is six hundred, similarly in Urmiya; the ratl elsewhere is that of Baghdad. The qafiz of Maragha and the mudd there is ten manns; the kaylaja is ة sixth of ة qafiz. .
In Tabriz it is among the customs of those in power to wear gold rings. In Lake Urmiya are mountains which are inhabited; the people there tie the legs of the youngsters with chains and ropes so that they do not roll down into the lake.
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
310
At Urmiya is a pass (ʿAqaba) on the road to Mosul; people have to go through on the necks of men even as animals are ridden, because of its difficulty.
The distances in this region:
From Bardhaʿa to YOniln, or to Bardlj, or to Janza, or to QalqlltOs, one stage in every instance.
From Yoniln to al-Baylaqlln, one stage; thence to Warthiln, one stage; thence to Talakhllb, one stage; thence to Barzand, one stage; thence to Ardabil, two stages.
From Bardlj to al-Shamllkhiya, two stages; thence to Shirwlln, three stages; thence to al-Abkhlln (al-Abkhllz), two stages; thence to Jisr SamOr, two stages; thence to Bllb al-Abwllb, three stages. p. 382 From Janza to Shamkor, one stage;
thence to Khunlln, three stages; thence to Qalaʿt Ibn Kandamlln, one stage; thence to Tiflis, two stages.
From QalqlltOs to Matrls, two stages; thence to Dumis, two stages; thence to KilakOni (Kaylakuwayn), two stages; thence you will be among the Armenians as far as Dabll.
From Dabll to Nashawll, four stages; thence to KhOy, three days journey; thence to Salamlls, two stages; thence to Urmiya, one stage; thence to Kharraqlln, two stages; thence to Marllgha, a like distance; thence to Ardabll, four farsakhs.
From Marllgha to Qandariya, two stages; thence to a village, three stages; thence to Qalaʿt al-Hasan bin ʿAll, one stage; thence to ShahrazOr, threefarsakhs.
311
THE REGION OF AL-RIHAB
From Marāgha to Nurln, one stage thence to Marand....
[lacuna in MS]
From Khoy to Qalaʿt Yonus, six stages;
thence to Qaryat al-ʿAsabiyyat, one stage; thence to....
[lacuna in MS]
thence to Tiflis, one stage;
thence to Tabla, thence to Shakki, thence to Lakzān, two stages in every instance;
thence to al-Bab [Bab al-AbwD.b], two stages.
From Marāgha to al-Kharraqan, two stages; thence to Tibriz, one stage; thence to Marand, one stage.
From Ardabil to al-Nlr (al-Blr), one stage; thence to Sarat, one stage; thence to Kolsarah (Korsarah), one stage; thence to Maragha, a like distance.
From Maragha to Khurah Rudh, one stage; thence to MosD. Abadh, one stage; thence to Barza, two post stages; thence to Tiflis, one post stage; thence to Jabirwan, one stage; thence to Narlz, two post stages; thence to Urmiya, one stage.
From Marand to al-NashawD., two difficult stages; thence to Dabil, two similar stages.
From Maragha to Saburkhast, one stage; thence to Barza, one stage; thence to al-Baylaqān, one stage; thence to Sisar, one stage; thence to Tall Wan, one stage; thence to al-Khabarjan (al-Jaraba(?)١ one stage; thence to al-Dinawar, one stage.
From Ardabil to al-Miyanij, two stages;
or to Qantarat Sabldhrudh, and from al-Qantara to al-Sarat, one stage;
p. 383
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
312
thence to Nawy, one stage; thence to Zanjlln, one stage.
From al-Miyanij to KhUnaj, one stage; thence to Kolsra, one stage; thence to Marllgha, one stage;
and from Marllgha to Kharraqlln, or to Urmiya, two stages in each instance;
thence to Salamlls, a like distance;
thence to KhUy, one stage;
thence to Barkarl, five stages;
thence to Arjlsh, two stages;
thence to Akhlllt, or to Badlis, three stages in each instance; and from Badlls to Amid, or to Mayyafllriqin, four stages in each instance. From Marllgha to al-Dinawar, sixty farsakhs; and from Ardabll to Tabriz. ...[lacuna in MS] thence to Barqoll.... [lacuna in MS] thence to Malazkird, three days travel; thence to Arzan, six; thence to Amid, four.
p. 384
The Region of Al-Jibal (“TheMountains”: wide wountain area WNW Irlln—ENEIrāq)
The grass of this region is the saffron; the drink of its people, honey and milk. Its trees, the walnut and the fig. It is a delightful recreation ground, fertile and important. Here is glorious al-Rayy and Hamadhan, and the precious district of Isbahan. Its superiority will appear to you when we describe its cities. We have mentioned al-Dinawar the elegant, imperial Karman Shahan; we have described Nihawand, and Qumm, and Qashan. And we have described Dummawand, and Qārj, and Qāsran. No heat is here, no fleas, no flies; no snakes, no scorpions, no worms. In summer it is a Paradise, a garden, an orchard; in winter there is wood and charcoal free of charge. Its dried meat is carried to Khuriisan; its grapes and apples last for a year; here is knowledge abundant, intelligence, skill and proficiency. Even so, the cold is severe; you see their cheeks cracked in the winter. Their arms and legs are always swarthy, their faces tawny, their noses running. They are either extreme Hanbalites, exaggerated in their love ofMu<awiya, or they are fanatic Najjarites; the people who believe in the return of al-Hadi they call heathens. And how often you witness the ground subside, and earthquakes! There is injustice of authority, and disorder; constant going and coming. Anyone who enters it to settle from above it or below it, you see him because of the cold and the climate always kept busy. Understand what I say, then you will reason it. Look out over al-ʿIrāq from the boundary of al-Saymara, for here are the mountains that have been described and illustrated. On Isfahan I have a brilliant treatise, and a jurist ifhe studies it will recognize it. So let me eliminate controversy and debate! Addition/version MS. c.
... and on Khflzistan from the direction of al-Qāntara (Qāntara Anda) and here are the mountains [al-Jibal] that have been described and portrayed; here are the events that have been celebrated and recorded, which Muhammad [ibn al-Hasan al-Shaybanl] has set forth in his elegantly-written books. On Isfahan I have a definitive treatise, explanatory, clear, and brilliant: a master of jurisprudence, should he study it, will approve of it. So let me eliminate altercation and dispute in matters of jurisprudence, analogy, and controversy.
Here is the map of it. [Map XV]
We have made this region three districts and seven sections. We have included Isfahan in the number, and have attached it to the edge of the map. We have given a separate description of it and enlarged the features there, and the excellent qualities we have mentioned.
The first district as you come from the direction of al-Rihab is al-Rayy; then Hamadhan, then Isfahan, then the sections of Qumm, Qshan, al-Saymara, Karaj, Mah al-Koff (Dinawar), Mah al-Basra (Nihawand), ShahrazUr.
p. 385
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
314
٠ضر
Map XV: Jibal Al-Daylam (see p. 419).
From MS. Sprenger 5-Ahlwardt 6034 by kind permission of the Staatsbibliothek Preussischer Kulturbesitz, Berlin, Orientabteilung.
315
THE REGION OF AL-JIBAL
Al-Rayy is a delightful district, with abundant water, splendid villages, fine fruits, extensive area, important rural districts. It was al-Rayy that ruined ʿUmar bin Saʿad, the troublemaker, so that he murdered Husayn, the son of ʿAll; yet he selected the city despite damnation, so that one says that God humiliated him: Must I leave the sovereignty of al-Rayy, and al-Rayy is my desire; or must I return, censured in the killing of Husayn.
In killing him is the fire from which there is no escape;
for the sovereignty of al-Rayy is the apple of my eye.
According to the annals, al-Rayy was a source of calamities and accordingly became damned: it is on a raging sea, its earth is damned, it refuses to accept the Truth. HllrOn al-Rashld said, “The world is four abodes: Damascus, al-Raqqa, al-Rayy, and Samarqand." Rawll bin Bayllln bin Isfahan mapped al-Rayy. It is also related that al-Rayy is one of the gates of the earth, and all mankind is drawn towards it. Said al-AsmaʿI: “Al-Rayy is the bride of the world, the road of the p. 386 earth." The climate is good, it is medial to Khurllslln, Jurjlln, and al-ʿIrāq. For its capital I know no other name [than it]; among its towns are: A wa, Sliwa, Qazwln, Abhar, Shalanba, al-Khwllr. Among the sections are: Qumm, Dummllwand, SharazOr. Among the rural districts are: Qusin, Qasrlln al-Dllkhil, Qasrlln al-Khllrij, Surr, Bihzlln, Qarj, Janll, Sirll, FirOzarllm.
Hamadhlln is a district situated in the centre of the region. It has important towns, is of ancient record. Hamadhlln bin al-Falloj bin Slim bin Noah-peace be upon him-laid it out. It has been said that al-Jiblll is an army and Hamadhlln its commander in chief. It has the sweetest water; its tracts are extensive, its rivers full, its trees intertwined, fruits are sweet, fighting is common; its rural district really filled me with astonishment. I read in some book that al-Rayy and Isfahlln were not of the territory of the Bahlawiyyln but only Hamadhlln, Mllsabadhlln; and Mihrijllnqudhaq, which is al-Saymara; and Mllh al-Basra, which is Nihawand; and Mllh al-Kofa, which is al-Dinawar. Among the towns of Hamadhlln are: Asadawlldh, A.wa, Bostah, Rllman, Wabh, Sirawand, Rodhrllwar, Tazar; and sections: Mah al-Kofa, Mllh al-Basra, Mllsabadhlln.
The attribution of Isfahlln, and places such as it, has an analogy in questions of the Shariʿa in this way: it is to the water left after drinking by the mule and the ass, according to the schools of our shaykhs, the people of al-ʿIrāq, and they say that since both animals have a similarity from two different causes, and vary from two different points of view, one should be cautious in each instance, and each cause given its due weight. Do you not see that they both resemble the cat in that they live in houses: thus one is exempt from avoiding [as ritually impure] the water they leave after drinking. They also resemble the dog, in that the flesh of p. 387 both is forbidden; accordingly you have to consider the decision from each point of view. So it is in the case of Isfahlln: since it resembles this region in language
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
316
and customs, but is included within the borders of Fars, so that the frontier rests right within the city, it is thus necessary that we attribute to it something from either side, giving it a distinctive position, a separate consideration. From this region its attribution is that it is mentioned and described as pertaining to it; that from Fars is its layout and pattern. But suppose the following is adduced: “Why don’t you make the question of Isfahan similar to that of the ears, as dealt with in the opinion of al-Shafiʿl, when the dispute arose as to whether they are part of the head or part of the face? He made a third category for them, stipulated fresh water [for washing them], and a separate [ritual] cleaning of them. This is the position in which Isfahan is put when it is said to be partly of the region of Fars, and partly of al-Jibal, but must be distinguished from both of them, described by itself) and placed as a buffer between the two." The answer here is that this analogy is false, since you did not provide a common basis for the two analogues; for anyone who draws an analogy from a part of the whole, without having a common basis draws a false analogy. But suppose it is alleged that the common basis between them is that there is some specific factor in each side that pulls the city back and forth [between the two regions] in a decisive way; the answer to that is that the Prophet-—od’s peace and blessings be upon him-said: “The two ears pertain to the head," and so he relieved us of any doubt and misconception. For how could we make the matter fundamental in argument if we were in doubt about it! If it should be said that his saying that they pertain to the head means they are in the head, the answer is that the Messenger of God-God’s peace and blessings be upon him-is exempt from saying anything idle, everyone knowing that they are in the head. All he wanted was to render a decision on the point in dispute, rather than making a statement on the location [of the ears]; for do you not realize that one does not allege that they are in the neck or in the shoulder. Moreover, even if this basic point were true, the analogy of Isfahan would not apply to it, for that would contradict the basic cause, giving rise, as it would, to fourteen regions and one kūra (district), the kūra standing without precedent. It is just as we have pointed out in the matter of the witr, where it is not permissible to fulfil this obligation with one unit of prayer alone, there being no precedent for this in the basic principles. If it should be asked, what this precedent is for the fourteen regions you have postulated, and among which you have distributed the realm of Islam, the answer is that the precedent is the setting up by the astrologers of the entire world into fourteen regions, seven inhabited, seven empty. Now if they had differentiated from them a portion, had distinguished a section from them, then the analogy with Isfahan would be correct. Suppose it were to be argued: “Why did you not make the case similar to that of the two ears, which are most certainly part of the head, thus saying that Isfahan is p. 388 definitely part of Fars?" The answer here is that what is commonly accepted knowledge is basic, in our belief, and takes precedence over analogy even as we have said before; and it is commonly accepted that the city is in the region of al-Jibal. Should some one say, “Well then, consider it part of al-Jibal," the
317
THE REGION OF AL-JIBAL
answer is that the demarcation and nomenclature [of places] by rulers, and their establishing of them, is also fundamental with us, and in our science. And the rulers are, in this matter, just as the Companions of the Prophet are in the matter of the Sharl'a; then just as it is not for the jurisprudents to be at variance with the Companions in any matter on which they expressed an opinion, so it is not for us to contradict the rulers in what they have prescribed. Now, they have included Isfahan in the official records of Fars, and have set the frontiers in it, but also in al-Rodhan; thus these two have also become two fundamental considerations pulling Isfahan back and forth [from one region to the other] for this reason. Nor have we seen any reason why we should not bring it into relation with the aforementioned analogy.
MS. B contains a reader’s observation on al-Muqaddasl’s discourse on Isfahan, as follows:
The author did not hit upon anything in the depiction of Isfahan for the purpose of writing about it, and accordingly composed the questions and answers so that his book would not bo deficient to the extent of saying at least something in respect of places such as that. May God shame him in as much as he has wasted our time in the reading of his irrelevancies that avail us nothing. Addition/version MS. c.
One of the inhabitants of Isfahan had compiled an important book about the place, in which he mentioned its towns and villages, its revenue and its rulers: this work is to be found in Naysabllr, and in the library of ʿAdhud al-Dawla.
Its capital is al-Yahfldiyya, and of its towns are al-Madlna, al-Bandajan, Sumayram, al-Zlz, al-D؛z, Ardistan, Kholajan.
Al-Yahodiyya is the capital of Isfahan; it is large, developed, and populous; many agricultural products, a city of commerce. The wells are sweet, fruits delicious, climate excellent, water light, soil remarkable. It is a beautiful spot; wealthy merchants are here, skilled artisans. Cloth is exported to faraway places. The people are Sunnl Muslims, skilled and intelligent. Their mosque is always filled with congregations. No heat is here, no fleas, no vermin. It is said that when Bukht Nasar (Nebuchadnezzar) moved the children of Israel out from the Holy Land, they looked around the places of the earth, and saw no place except this that resembled their own land, so they settled there. However, it is a Paradise grazed by cattle; the people are barbarous in speech, no generosity, no kindness-under their turbans are pillows! In their business dealings is deceit; and they dry out their lungs in Hanbalite fanaticism. One of them may be seen in his clothes and sandals, and in his sleeve a loaf he is gnawing, or raisins he is nibbling.
It resembles Damascus. The buildings here are ofclay-and what clay! Clay, I have never seen the like of it! Some of the markets are covered and some are p. 389 open. The mosque is in the markets. It is handsome, on rounded pillars, with a minaret on the side towards its Qjbla, a height of seventy cubits, and entirely of
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
318
clay, absolutely nothing else. The river flows through the town, but the people do not drink from it, for it has become polluted from the sewage dropped into it. The town has twelve gates.
Addition/version MS. c.
Al-Yahodiyya is the capital of Isfahan, a populous town of many good thing and glories. I have heard that the children of Israel, when Bukht Nasar [Nebuchadnezzar] moved them out from Jerusalem, traveled over the earth and did not find a place with a climate like that ofJerusalem and its excellence, other than this; accordingly, a considerable number of them settled there. For myself,
I have not seen a mosque other than the mosque of Misr more crowded with congregations than their mosque, nor in the region a town more populous than their town, nor in the entire realm of al-Islam a soil the like of theirs. They are a people of the Sunna and Congregation, of refinement and eloquence. How many readers of the Qurʾān, litterateurs, jurisprudents, and intelligent people it has produced! There is fruit always available here, and prosperity everywhere in evidence. I used to buy the most excellent grapes there at the time of Nayroz (New Year’s Day) at a dinaq for one mann [a weight] of theirs, similarly for the most excellent apples. It is situated between Fars, Khozistan, al-Rayy, and Hamadhan; and the caravans are continually going to it from al-Basra and Khurasan. It is a Paradise except for the grazing of swine there; the speech of the people is barbarous, their food dirty, their stream polluted. One ofthem may be seen in his attire and slippers and turban, in his pouch or sleeve a loaf he is gnawing, or raisins he is nibbling. They destroy business relationships. They dry out their lungs in their exaggerated fanaticism for Mu'awiya.
The city is larger than Hamadhan, more developed than al-Rayy; it is situated on low ground some distance from the mountains. The mosque stands in the midst of the markets; the stream cuts through the town, but is polluted from the amount of filth tossed into it The drinking water of the inhabitants is from sweet wells. The town has twelve gates. Most of their marketplaces are shaded, and not at all attractive.
Al-Madlna: is about two miles from al-Yahudiyya; on high ground, with fortress, below it a large bridge; here is a mosque old and strong.
Al-Khalanjan: in the direction of Khuzistan; it is large, populous, producing much fruit.
Sumayram: at the foot of a mountain; an abundance of walnuts and fruits; here stands an exquisite modern mosque some distance from the markets; here is flowing water in the market and in the streets, coming down to them from a spring in the mountain on the way toward al-Yahudiyya. A celebrated fortress is there with a spring of water; and the coffers of the kings are still in this fortress.
Al-Ziz is a small town in the mountains, on the River Tab. I bought bread there, eight manns, of their mann, for a dirham. Meat and walnuts and the other fruits there are cheap. A delightful mosque was built there in the year
36٦/9٦٦.
p. 390
319
THE REGION OF AL-JIBAL
Addition/version MS. c.
The mosque here was built in the year three hundred sixtyteight [978 CE], while I was there. The town is situated in the mountains, on the river Tab; the inhabitants have spring wells, also.
Ardistan: bigger than these towns, in the direction of the desert; the markets excellent; the town populous; a mosque; elders and jurists here. It is a town of the whiteness of flour, and from this it derives its name.
Qashan is on the edge of the desert. Its name is famous and it is of ancient establishment. Around it are fine farms, and a number of canals. The people are skilled in the making of the long narrow-necked bottles. I saw tarragon there like myrtle, smooth; I have not seen its like. This town is one of the sources of excellent plums, and here are remarkable scorpions. I heard that when Abo Mosa al-Ashʿari failed to conquer the town, he brought thither some scorpions of Naslbln that they had trapped in jars. He threw them inside the fortress, where they kept them busy and irritated them; so they surrendered the town.
Isfahan is an important district, and Qumm and Karaj pertained to it: however, one of the khalifs added them to al-Rayy and Hamadhan. The administrative offices of this district are still separate; mention of it has precedence because of its importance with the kings and the rulers.
Al-Rayy is an important town, delightful, distinguished; many glories and much fruit; the markets are spacious, the hostels attractive, the baths good, foods aplenty, little to hurt one, abundance of water, flourishing commerce. Learned people are the leaders, the public is intelligent, the women are good housekeepers; the stores are splendid. The weather is pleasing; it is an elegant, clean place. The people have beauty, intelligence, honour, refinement. Here are councils and schools; natural talents, handicrafts; granaries. There is generosity, and special attributes. The preacher is not wanting in jurisprudence, nor the leader in knowledge; the magistrate does not lack good repute nor the orator decorum. It is one of the glories of Islam, one of the chief cities of the countries. Here are elders, nobles, readers, Imams, ascetics, conquerors, high purpose. Here is ice and snow aplenty. The barley beer is famous, the cloth renowned, the preachers are expert. The rural districts are important. Here is a library of remarkable books; the amazing “courtyard of the water melon;" delightful al-Rodha. Here is a castle, and an inner city. The hostels are good, full of furnishings, pleasant, splendid.
One day we went to visit Abu al-ʿAbbas al-Yazdadi-Nasir al-Dawla had given him a good place to live in Naysabor-and said he: “I did not know that Naysabor was as good as this; is al-Rayy similar to it?" Then everyone who was with him spoke. Said I, “God uphold the shaykh! Naysabnr is bigger, more populous, more prosperous; al-Rayy is more pleasant, more delightful, its water more abundant." In fact al-Rayy is beyond what we have described; however, its water causes diarrhea, its melons kill, its scholar is in error. Most of the animals they sacrifice are cows. There is little firewood, much discord. Their meats are
P. 391
uvqu padojaAsp ؛٧؛ uu OABIJ ajdoad S٧I JOJ؛3JE M3J ‘p3٧Bj3 ااأ3 SUBJOINS ؛u ؛٧‘ سبملأو ؛٧ UBUU OS JOU scq^ n٩؛pi؛s3u—ءل-لاهد؛s 3„3٩لا3JOUU ‘snojndod 3JOUU „داأ3ل3 ؛ugqpBUUBH s؛ UUOJJ XBASE ujnu ؛٧‘ uvqu JOJ ؛٠II٥H s» i preg^؛uoq.vi ‘gus اأ3 p3AJ3s٩o ااأ3؛ل suuajqojd‘
٧n٩ UJSAod 31(1^ ؛ugqpBUUBH u ؛'uappm JOU s d ءهء	ق3٨0لاد؛P3JB33U03 s ؛SUMOU JSIJUO u‘
pUB اا31 Ploo ؛UgqpBUUBH u ؛UOJlJ3 B s؛3 .^pvjvuu دا31 ؤل3 ؛‘Ploo SJ33J uvaq s٧t ‘ugqpBUUBH u Bg -J33JS pUB MOUS؛uaod 31(1 p:
p ssau^js؛3i٩B٧nd3JS‘ ااأ3؛ل ٧bj333bx3؛3J3JJ snojjojou uo ؛i pile japunip s؛u٧q3؛‘3u Ploo s٧t ؛31(1 puB ‘uMouq-jpAi s ؛31(1 JO ^snojES ؛٩vqu؛s٧UB٧ ؛٩J3AOjd s؛B!‘ ااأ3؛ل U3UUB pooads [jaipo] seq UJ SUB3UUJO 33UBpun٩B؛٧؛S3‘ ؛‘J3A3M0JJ •qjBd B auipnjou ؛٧3BJ٧٧B UB s؛UMOU 3A؛ 1)31 auaqu pB3J٩ ؛UB ‘UU3IJ33X3 AJOUOIPOJUOD 31(1 ‘dvaqo s ؛3JJU33 31(1 u‘ ؛s ؛nj u؛٧3 s٩m٩ns 31(1 puB ‘suأ3؛ل3ل3 ؛٧ ٧no٩B punoj UBqpBUUBH ؛3M pUB ‘uaqjBUU 31(1 u„-n٩؛٧l؛ pUB اا31؛ل 3JE SUaqjBUU ؛SMOJ aajqu u دا31 ؛A٧p J3UU‘ SJ3JBM UUOJJ dn 3j٩٩n٩ ؛٧ UJ ؛pooa s ؛ppuu ‘jauuuuns u ؛M u؛J3٧U داأ3 anbsouu ؛s a3JB3jdo3d؛ou U3A AOI ‘Xj3٧٧b٧؛puB ‘UMOU 31(1 punojjns suapjBQ jaSuJUS 31(1 āu J3UE.M ؛uds ^UBUU ‘Ploo s؛3J3qsāu؛ B ٧nB3٩؛PJO UB puB ‘anbsouu jnj n٩؛pj؛Su داأ3 tuogiaj aqujo sijodouuauu 31(1 ‘ugqpBUUBH‘ ؛B s لءلج3اUMOU PJO uuBSBOjd داأ3 JO ااأ3 P؛J٧S؛٧3‘ JO 3UO puB ااأ3 U٧؛^qdosopqd puB oouapaidsunljo S3U ٠s٩jn٩ns دا31 jp؛٩u؛J3٧E.M 3u ؛UJ 'UUB3JUS B pUB ‘UJEJ ‘s„3w UUOJJ s ؛٧U٥JJ 31(1 s؛J3 d- £B :UIMZEQ	z٥ ٩لة3 UMOU س{بم A ^UBUU؛SpjB^3U؛ UB ؛SS3JJJOJ B ‘Aup J3UU ؛u اا31
ءل-لا0|ء ؛EJ3SUEAEJE3 B u؛؛ 1)31 UOJ3UU J3UE.M n٩؛pi؛3u ؛s S3٩؛-anbsouu 31(1 ap ؛٠s٩jn٩ns 31(1 u SUUB3JUS SJBUBD pile ‘UMOJ 31(1 tginouqu MO٧ دا31 XjBjqil ؛s MOJ3٩ Aup ؛M ‘snojndod s؛٧noq٧ sjuauudojaAsp 31(1 puB suaqjBiu 31(1 ‘suaqjBuu 3٩؛3u JOU qa٩؛pu ؛٧- داأ3 ؛Xup J3UU ؛snojndod s؛ ااأ3 ssauuuoj ؛s ؛nu u؛su داأ3 jajno pa^ouusap U33٩ داأ3 anbsouu ؛aqujo aSpa 31(1 uo s ؛Aup J3UU‘ S3٩؛‘SSSJJJOJ 31(1 3P UJ ؛B s ٩لة3 ٧no٩B ‘UMOU IJ3B3 hhvsavJ B ئ؛ qs٧no s٧l 1JOAOMOq؛OABIJ s٧j ٧n٩ 33ds3 no^ sunoABj aqjt؛uaqu ‘^„B اأ3 ؛jd B s؛yod 3uu؛3٧B3 uvqu اأ3 ؛s ؛u ااأ3 ل؛3اأاء٧n٩ 3SJ3A3J 31(1 ؛anuu s؛
لآ3 سللل Xq puB uunoj^ 31(1 Aq JE3.MS ااأ3 ung أبمول3 ؛JOJBS UB3 no^ 3UO ou s^ quiAS Xipuauj 3٩•
دا31د 3٨3 JB3٧Sلداا1؛1٧ة UUOJJ J٧؛SUBIjaUJEO ou S3٧؛
UBUU AtuH^ j٩؛pUB spuc3 q٧؛3JE S3A3 اا31ل3أ 1)31 SB SuBlJ SJB3UU ا1؛3ا1 أبمول3 supounouu 31(1 SB 1)31 pB3J٩ ؛SU3dX3 S٧I u؛UU3 31(1 scq SS3U3A؛JO 33U3U اا31 دل3ءا0ل؛
UJ ءآلأدد ااأ3 bvuvp BJO anjBA 31(1 scq wvifJtp‘
JO ااأ3 :PJBS seq sjaod
S3٧٧giis 31(1 JOJ ^cp 3UO ‘sauijBUBH 31(1 JOJ ^cp 3UO ‘aoutyiBA UB 3JE anbsouu 3U٠ pjBlJ‘ اا31؛ل pjBlJ 3JE SUJEOq‘ اا31؛ل ٧b33j3uO؛P UO؛3I٩B33j3eS دا31 UB suuguuj اا31
OZf
SNOID3U 3HL JO 3D٥3٦MON^ د0لا SNOISIAia Lsaa 3HL
321
THE REGION OF AL-JIBAL
al-Rayy has taken away its prosperity. Itis close to the mountain; their buildings are of clay. I read in a book that it was two post stages in both dimensions but that Bukht Nasar [Nebuchadnezzar] on his return from the conquest ofJerusalem, wanted to conquer it, but his general failed. So he wrote to him, “Map it for me;" and when he saw the map of it he gathered his sages and consulted them in the matter. Said they, “Block off their springs for a year, then release the water, and the city will drown." When the water did flow over the city it destroyed most of it, so he took possession of it; and to this day there are refuges and hiding places to be found there. The inner city is on an eminence.
Asadawadh is a small town but well built; the market is busy; many agricultural products here, and honey. About afarsakh away is Iwan Kisra [the Arch of Kisra]; al-ʿAqaba is between it and Hamadhan. In this town there is running water; the mosque is in an alley, delightful and well attended.
Tazar: some distance from the main road; a palace of Kisra here. Prices are low, especially for bread; the markets are covered.
Al-Rodha and Bustah are sources of almonds; a mann of kernels for four diinaqs. A large stream here; situated among the mountains.
Qarmasln [(Kirman Shah(an)] is a pleasant place, surrounded by gardens. The mosque is in the markets; a fine one. ʿAdhud al-Dawla built a beautiful residence there. The town is on the main road; its springs are famous.
Qasr al-LusOs (Robbers’ Castle) is a small town; a stone castle, upon pillars, is here. There have been some remarkable exploits here.
Nihawand-that is Mah al-Basra-a large town with streams, good fruits; two mosques; saffron farms. The town is in two parts. The mosque, which is in the middle of the town, has no equal in building or beauty in the region.
A town near it is Rudhrawar, with saffron farms.
Slrawand: a town at the foot of a mountain; the drinking water is from springs; many gardens and fruits.
Al-Dlnawar-is Mah al-Koff is a fine town, well-built; elegant people. The markets are close together. The water is cold, and you will see no cleaner; for on the edges of the springs they have built drinking tubes of different kinds through which the water comes out-
Addition/version MS. c.
... siphon tubes through which the water is drawn out, similar to that called
muzamma/a [insulated household vessel of cold water, perforated so persons
may drink from it through straws] in al-ʿIrāq; the town bubbles with springs. Gardens surround it; the mosque is some distance from the markets. Over the pulpit is a beautiful dome, and there is a maqsūra than which I have never seen finer, raised above the floor of the mosque.
Al-Saymara-it is Masabadhan-is a large developed town, plenty of agricultural produce, a rural district beside it. It is among the mountains; quite an extensive province, on a difficult road.
p. 394
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
322
Karaj Abi Dulaf is a town built on a height; the houses are not continuous; it has one mosque. The waters here are just as we said for al-Dinawar; here too is another Karaj.
Addition/version MS. c.
It produces a great variety of fruits, palm trees, nuts. The buildings here are of plaster and stone, and streams flow among them. It is a good, pleasant place, but somewhat small; the town of al-Slrawan here has cultivated fields and date palms. As for Karaj, the settlement is sparse, and it has one mosque. The waters here are just as we mentioned for al-Dlnawar, and it is ascribed to Abo Dulaf Burj, lesser than it, is on the main road; behind it is an extensive district whither the route is difficult.
A Summary Account of Conditions in this Region
This is a cold region, with much snow and ice. It is light on the heart, for there is grace and elegance in the people, if you separate Isfahiln from it. Jews are more prevalent than Christians here, with many Magians. Jurists and preachers here have respect and standing; and the area is famous for its agricultural products.
Addition/version MS. c.
Here there is no continuous hot weather, and no date palms, except at al-Saymara and at al-Slrwan. In fact in of the regions of the realm of al-Islam the date palm is to be found, except for al-Rihab; it does not occur, either, in the territories of the Romaeans. Abo ʿAbd Allah Muhammad bin Ahmad al-Dabbas related to me the following tradition in Arrajan. He said that al-Qādhl al-Hasan bin ʿAbd al-Rahman told him that he had it from ʿUqba bin Muhammad al-Basrli who had it from Ahmad bin Abo ʿAbd Allah al-Islaml, who had it from Abo Qutayba Muslim bin Qutayba al-Bahall, on the authority of Yosuf, on the authority of al-Harith al-Tāʾifl. Said he: I heard ʿA.mir al-Sha'hl say that Qāysar wrote to ʿUmar bin al-Khattab: “From Qāysar [Caesar], King of the Romaeans to ʿUmar bin al-Khattab, greetings! My emissaries have informed me that you have a desiccated tree that does not have the ordinary characteristics of a tree, and which puts forth ears like those of an ass. It then bursts into the form of pearls, which then turn green like unto green emeralds, then redden so as to resemble the ruby. The parts then become succulent as food likeftludhaj [a sweet made of flour and honey]. It then dried so that it becomes a means of sustenance for a person who is settled, and a means of provision for a person traveling. Now if my emissaries have informed me correctly, this is surely one of the trees of paradise.” So ʿ٧mar-may God be pleased with him-wrote in reply: “From CUmar to Qāysar, greetings! Indeed, your emissaries have informed you correctly, and it is the very tree that God-mighty and exalted bo He-planted for Maryam [Mary] on the occasion she was in childbed with Jesus, so fear God, and do not ascribe divinity to Jesus unless it bo from God.”
Various sects are here. In al-Rayy most are Hanafites, being Najjilrites; except that in the rural districts of the metropolis they are Zaʿfarilnites, believing
p. 395
323
THE REGION OF ALJIBAL
in a created Qu^ān. I have heard one of the preachers of the ruler say: “The people of the countryside are my congregation .in all matters, except in the matter of the creation of the &^ān” I saw that Abo ʿAbd Allah bin al-Zaʿfaranl had renounced the school of his fathers for the school of al-Najjllr, and the people of the rural districts cleared him of any wrongdoing. In al-Rayy are many Hanbalites, and they are much in evidence, and the populace follows the jurists in the matter of the creation of the Qu^ān. The people of Qumm are extreme Shlʿa; they have given up assemblies and neglected the mosque; so that Rukn al-Dawla compelled them to take care of it and its needs.
The people of Hamadhiln and its districts are followers of the Tradition, except in al-Dinawar, where privately, and publicly, and openly they belong to the school of Sufyiln al-Thawrl. In the mosque the iqlima is said twice: the people of Isfahiln followed this manner in olden times.
They choose the system of reading of Abo ʿUbayd and Abo Hiltim, the chanting of Abo ʿAmr and Ibn Kathlr.
Their commerce is flourishing. In al-Rayy they produce garments, and munayyar p. 396 cloth, and cotton; large bowls, large needles, and combs. From Qawln, garments, leather sacks, arrows; from Qumm, chairs, bridles, saddles, cloth, and much saffron; from Hamadhiln and its sections, cloth, saffron, tin, [or, alloy ofsilver and lead], fox skins, sable skins, boots, cheeses; from Surr fine taylaslins, handsome clothes.
Among their specialties: the water melons and the plums of al-Rayy; the cloaks of Isfahiln, its padlocks, salted meat and dairy products; the long-necked bottles ofQashiln, and its vegetables; the cheese of al-Dlnawar, the mint of Q!azwln, and its arrows.
There are partisanships in the matter of the creation of the &^ān in al-Rayy; and in Qazwln also, between the Hanafites and the Shilfiʿtes. In Hamadhiln they do not follow any schools.
As for their waters: the wells of Isfahiln are bad; the water of al-Rayy causes diarrhea. Anyone who drinks of the Qazwln River, if he is a stranger, his toes fall off from both feet. The water of the Zanda Rodh is healthy, the climate there remarkable. The fruits of al-Rayy are bad.
There are remarkable things here. Near Blsuton is a remarkable representation they assert is the steed of Kisril. The river of Isfahiln has a remarkable debouchment that only a bird can get near. In the rural district ofRuwaydasht are sands like mountains; the wind does not affect them nor do they bother the people. In the section of Qashiln is a fortress with a ditch around it, and around that the sand; the wind blows around there, but not a particle of the sand blows into
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
324
the ditch; and if sand is thrown into it, the wind blows immediately and takes it out. In the middle of the sands is a steppe about afarsakh in each direction, and the farms there are just as we have mentioned about the ditch. When lions encounter livestock in that steppe they do not even venture to harm them. In the sections of Qashan is a mountain that exudes an exudation like sweat, but it is p. 397 not, however, fluent; when the month of the day of Tlr [13th day of 4th month of Persian solar year] arrives, every year people flock there with receptacles, and the holder of the receptacle beats it with a stone, saying, “Water us with thy water, because of so-and-so," and each one of them collects enough for the occasion. In the sections of Qashan are plants which are spread on the surface of the ground; they become glass, are white and shining, and are used in medicine. In the sections of Isfahan is a meadow in which are snakes between one and five cubits. In the rural districts of Quhistan are snakes with which youngsters play without their biting them. In the rural districts of al-Zarjanan is a village called Matha; here is a small creature, in appearance like a dung beetle; it moves in the dark night, glows like a lamp; and you may observe that the place of the glow, by daylight, is green. In this section is a rock like granulated sugar, and if you strike one against another fire comes out. In Qashan is water, which, after irrigating seeds, then turns to stone. In Quhistan is water, should anyone drink of it, and the leeches should stick in his throat, he will die right away. Here also is a cave from which water trickles, then turns to stone. A tree here grows very large, the leaves looking like spoons and fingers. In the rural district of al-Ghamdan is a spring from which a fish emerges in the days of spring; then a black snake comes out of it, and when the two have come out, the water oozes away for a year. At the entrance of the mosque of al-Yahndiyya is a tree said to resemble [wood from] al-Waqwaq [Madagascar]. There are mines in the rural district of Quhistan, and in al-Taymara al-Sughra and al-Taymara al-Kubra, mines of silver and gold. In Quhistan is a source of bitumen; in Saghand, excellent vitriol, somewhat like the Egyptian variety. The mountain of antimony [used in making kohl] is in the district of Isfahan.
The mann varies in size. The mann of al-Rayy is six hundred [grains], and their ratl is three hundred; the mann of the rest of the region is four hundred. Meat in al-Rayy is weighed by the ratl, pharmaceuticals are weighed by the mann of p. 398 Khurasan. The mann of the districts of Isfahan is three hundred, and the mann of al-Yahodiyya is that used in Hamadhan.
The measures vary. Thefarib is twenty qafiz and six akufa(sg., kaj]}; the jarib of Ardistan is seventeen manns; the jarib of al-Yahndiyya is thirteen of those used in Ardistan. The counterpoise weights used are those ofKhurasan; the weight used in al-Rayy increases in every hundred a dirham and a quarter. The weight of Tabaristan is heavier.
325
THE REGION OF ALJIBAL
The people of al-Rayy alter their names. They say for CAli and Hasan and Ahmad: “CAlkii, and Haskii and Hamkii." The people ofHamadhan say: “Ahmadlā, and Muhammadlā, and Cīshlā;" in Sawa they say “Abu al-CAbbiisiin, Hasniin, JaCfariin." The most frequent agnomen of the people ofQumm is Abo Jaʿfar; of the people of Isfahl'ln, Abu Muslim; of the people of Qazwln, Abu al-Husayn. The languages used here vary. In al-Rayy speakers use the rā> [r], saying “radah," “rakin." The people ofHamadhl'ln say “wl'ltum," “wl'lto." In Qazwln they use the qāf [q]; and most of them say for “al-jayyid" [good], “naj." The language of the people of Isfahiln is barbarous-they drawl it. Among the languages of the non-Arabic speaking people there is none easier to use than the language of the people of al-Rayy.
The fairest in complexion are the people of al-Rayy; the others are swarthy. Here are towering mountains, such as Blsuton, forbidding, smooth, not climable; in it is a cave, within which is a flowing spring. Mount Daml'lwand is extremely forbidding; it may be seen from fifty farsakhs away, and I have heard it said that no one climbs it. The mountains of al-Khurramdīniyya are inaccessible-here are a sectarian people, without dissension among them. They do not wash themselves from ritual impurity, and I did not see in their villages a prayer house. There were some debates between them and me, and I said, “Do not the Muslims invade you, even though you believe this doctrine?" Said they, “Are we not monotheists?" Said I, “How is that, since you have repudiated the religious obligations of your God, and neglected the Shariʿa?" Said they, “We pay the ruler a great deal of money every year."
I know of no sights here. However, here are some of the wonders of the Kisrl'ls, and sites of the Pharaohs: for example Qasr (the palace of) Shlrln, the palace of Khusraw, the palaces of Kisril. Here is the canal which is raised in the rock, measuring about a farsakh, in which wine and milk used to flow, or some story to that effect.
Among their faults are what we set out in the summary of the region. In the people oflsfahl'ln is stupidity, and exaggerated devotion to Mu(jlwiya. A man was extolled to me for his asceticism and piety; so I set out to visit him, leaving the caravan behind me. I stayed that night with him, asking him questions. Eventually I said, “What do you say about the ruler?" Then he began cursing him and said that he had brought us a doctrine we did not know. Said I, “And what is that?" “He maintains that MuʿUwiya was not a worthy successor." Said 1: “And what do you yourselfsay?" Said he, “I say, just as God said,—may He be great and exalted—‘We make no distinction between any one ofhis messengers.’ (QJlriin, sora 2, verse 285). Now Abu Bakr was a proper successor, and ʿUmar
p. 399
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
326
was a proper successor," and he went on until he named the four, then said he: “And Mu<awiya was a proper successor." Said I, “Do not say this. You see, the four were khalifs, and Mu<awiya was a monarch. And the Prophet-—od’s peace and blessings be upon him-said, ‘The khalifate will come after me for thirty years. Then there will be a king.’" So he began to revile me, and started saying to the people, “This man is a Rafidite [forsaker schismatic];" and if the caravan had not arrived they would have attacked me. They have several stories on this topic, and you notice them drying their lungs [shouting] and grieving over it.
The women are in charge ofthe baths. You see the turbans ofthe people, like pillows; they have dreadful dispositions, and abominable customs-AntiChrist will come out of their market!
The sovereignty there goes back to al-Daylam; and al-Rayy is among the most important of their dominions. The first man who overcame the region and took it away from the possession of the khalifs of the dynasty of Saman was al-Hasan bin Buwayh, who adopted the name Rukn al-Dawla; then his son, Buwayh who called himselfMuʾayyid al-Dawla; then his brother, ʿAli who called himself Fakhr al-Dawla-his commander-in-chief lives in al-Damghan. They p. 40 defeated the populace, taking their houses and their villages, and most of the people moved away from their tyranny. They are now more godly, and have a Persian administration, though some vicious customs. However, they do not deprive people of what is bequeathed them; and if they grant something they let it continue to the [person’s] death. They have power and prestige, patience in war; they have backing, an extensive kingdom, a powerful state. They have been named in the Friday sermons in China and in al-Yaman; they have been a match for the kings at any time; and the king of the orient was unable to withstand them. And the khalifs of Bani al-ʿAbbas are under their interdiction, and seven splendid regions are in their grasp.
The imposts in this region are neither many nor heavy except in Isfahan and its sections. Thirty dirhams are taken for every load entering al-Yahfldiyya.
The land tax of al-Rayy is ten thousand dirhams; the land tax of al-Dlnawar is three thousand thousand dirhams; the land tax of Qumm is two thousand thousand dirhams. Qazwln, Abhar, and Zanjan a thousand thousand and six hundred thousand and twenty-eight thousand; al-Saymara, three thousand thousand and a hundred thousand; Qashan, a thousand thousand; Damawand, ten thousand thousand.
As for distances in this region:
From al-Rayy to Kllln, one stage;
thence to Kays, one stage;
thence to al-Khuwar, one stage.
327
THE REGION OF ALJIBAL
From al-Rayy to Qustlln, one stage; thence to Mushkilya, one stage; thence to Wabarilh(?), one stage; thence to Sllwa, one stage; thence to Sonaqln (Sobaqln), one stage; thence to al-Masdaql'ln, one stage; thence to al-Rodha, one stage; thence to al-Dukklln, one stage.
From Hamadhlln to Bozanajird, one stage; thence to Qaryat al-Jinn, one stage; thence to al-Dukklln, one stage.
From Hamadhlln to Asadawlldh, one stage; thence to Qasr al-Lusos, one stage; thence to Qantarat al-Nutman, one stage; thence to Jabal Blsuton, one stage; thence to Qrmasln, one stage; thence to Qasr ʿAmr, two post stages; thence to al-Zubaydiyya, one stage; thence to Tazar, one-half stage; to al-Marj, a like distance; thence to Hulwlln, one stage.
From Karj to Suwl'ld Muqawwala, one stage; thence to Khozan, one stage; thence to Barzl'lnylln, one stage; thence to A wa, one stage; thence to Qaryat Jarl'l, one stage; thence to Ribl'lt Jarl'l, one stage; thence to Warl'lmln (Varl'lmln), one stage; thence to Kaskana, one stage; thence to al-Rayy, one stage.
From Karj to Wafrllwanda, one stage; thence to Dllrqlln, one stage; thence to Khurodh, one stage; thence to Silburkhuwl'ls, one stage; thence to Karkawīsh, one stage; thence to the Khlln (caravanserai), one stage; thence to Ruzmmiln, one stage; thence to al-Lor, one stage.
p. 401
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
328
From Qasr al-Lusus to Kir Haras, one stage; thence to Nihawand, two post stages. p. «2 From Hamadhan to al-Daymar, one stage; thence to Rakah, one stage; thence to Nihawand, one stage.
From Nihawand to Rakah, one stage; thence to Khwarab, one stage; thence to al-Karaj, one stage.
From Hamadhan to Taq Saʿld, one stage; thence to Jorab, one stage.
From al-Karj to Jaranabadh, one stage; thence to Abtʿah, one stage; thence to Jurbadhaqan, one stage; thence to Qanwan, one stage; thence to Marj Wazhar, one stage; thence to al-Marabīn (al-Saramin), two post stages; thence to Izmīran, two stages; thence to al-Yahndiyya, one-half stage.
The Region of Khunistan
(Littoral Lowlands of Iran at Head of Arabian Gullf)
The soil of this region is copper, its plants are gold; here is an abundance of fruits, rice, sugarcane. Here are plums, grains, dates, superb citrus, pomegranates, grapes; a pleasant, good region. Its rivers are admirable; its cloth is silk brocade and poplin, and fine cloths of cotton and silk. It is a source of sugar, candy, superb confections, of honey, superb sugar syrup. Here is Tustar, whose name is known in the East and in the West; and al-ʿAskar which bestows distinction on the two realms; al-Ahwaz, famous in the East and in the West; Basinnll from where the curtains have the highest quality in the world. You do not see poplin like that of al-Sus; and along with this, here are sources ofnaphtha and tar; farms of aromatic plants and birds. Then, it is situated between Fl\rs and al-ʿIrllq, right where the battles of al-Islam were fought, for there are the battlefields of the nation; also the grave of Daniel. It does not lack jurists and scholars; and not in the eight regions are there any with purer speech. Here are ingenious water wheels, remarkable mills; amazing achievements, numerous specialties, abundant waters. Its revenues used to support the khalif; and it has splendour and elegance. In the eight regions none other than it pleased me. Indeed there would not be a more splendid region, were it not for its people; nor finer capitals were it not for its metropolis; for the meaning of al-Ahwaz is “dunghill of the world," its people among the wicked of mankind. We shall mention about it every account that has been related, or proverb that has been coined. Ibn Masʿūd-may God be pleased with him-said, “I heard the Prophet-God’s peace and blessings be upon him-say, ‘Let no tribe marry with the Khūz, for their veins call for disobedience.’" Moreover, ʿAli bin Abu Tlllib-may God be pleased with him-said, “There is no one on the face of the earth more wicked than the Khūz, nor have they ever produced a prophet or a noble person." Said ʿUmar-may God be pleased with him: “If I live long enough I will certainly sell the Khuz, and will put their price in the treasury." And in another account, “Anyone whose neighbour is a Khuzl, and needs his price, let him sell him." A jurist was asked about a man who swore he would cook the worst bird with the worst firewood, and would feed it to the worst of mankind. Said he, “He must cook the Egyptian vulture with oleander wood, and feed it to a Khuzl." You do not find among them all that wealth, admirable commerce, valuable manufacturing, with the discrimination and management you find among others. When their youngsters grow up they send them into migration, making them experienced in travel and moneymaking, so they move around from country to country. They have no need of learning or refinement.
The Khuz are those who are higher up [the mountains] than al-AhwllZ, for most ofthe people of al-Ahwaz have moved from al-Basra and Fl\rs. One day I was walking with Abo Jaʿfar bin Mahsan in al-Ahwaz, when one of the marketeers
p. I
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
330
began to argue with him, so said he: “You are the Khuz people, and you are no good." Said the marketeer: “The Khoz are the people above al-Ahwāz, such as those of al-ʿAskar and JundaysabOr and al-Sos; but we are ʿIrāqīs." I heard that the people of Basinnil, and Bayrūt, and the places in that area have tails between their foreparts and posteriors similar to fingers. Do you not notice that the people of al-ʿIrāq say to them in vilification, “Hey KhOzl, you with the tail!" And the man who was found among the Khwarij when they fought ʿAlī, the Commander of the Faithful-may God be pleased with him-was shown to him, and he said that he had a breast like the breast of a woman; this man was from the spot we have mentioned. You see them screaming for no reason; they are the people of hate and jealousy, and extremism in doctrine. May God forgive us, and them, but no offence in what I have said about their faults! For we do not wish to lift the curtain from them, nor to expose their failings; but we have merely clarified what was related about them, and attributed to the Prophet-—od’s peace and blessings be upon him-and his Companions.
Here is a map of what it looks like, correct to the best of our knowledge, and exercise of our science [Map XVI]. And of God we ask help and success; in Him we seek refuge, and of Him ask the right way.
Addition/version MS. c.
And whenever one ʿrilql reviles another, he says to him, “begone, Khūzī”.
In them is barbarism and roughness, and but little chivalry; you find in them a stupidity so that they are of no service to the traveler, nor indeed is there any benefit in them for the settled populations. They scream that their water boils in the summer, their houses are scorched from the heat. They speak like fiends, and evident among them are the abodes of the unrighteous. You see them with those riches in abundance, handsome shops, and fine handicrafts. When their youths come into the prime of life they afflict them by traveling, exposing them to risks, and keeping them busy in making profits. They roam over the earth, but without learning or refinement, but of course they have no need for these, except perhaps for a very little. Most of the people are weavers. The pious among them are Hubbiyya [an anthropomorphist sect among the Sūfīs, who worship God, not through fear or in hope of reward, but solely through love]. The customs of the people are pre-Islamic, their heads are ugly, their dispositions vile. May God forgive us, and them, but we have not selected those faults of theirs we have portrayed except that we wanted thereby to present a clear illustration: it is certainly not done in calumniation, rather we have expressed what was transmitted from the Prophetson whom be peace-and reported of the Companions.
You should know that this region was known formerly as al-AhwilZ, along with its seven districts; but now, the classification of some of those districts is in abeyance, some districts are in dispute, and about some our sources are contradictory. We have said that the situation of the kings, in our science, is like the situation of the Companions of the Prophet in the science of the Shari<a. For
P. 404
p. 404
331
THE REGION OF KHUZISTAN
Map XVI: Khozistān (see p. 420).
From MS. Sprenger 5-Ahlwardt 6034 by kind permission of the Staatsbibliothek Preussischer Kulturbesitz, Berlin, Orientabteilung.

THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
332
if one of them made a pronouncement to which there was no contradiction from among the Companions, his statement was accepted and became authoritative. Now ʿAdhud al-Dawla [324/936 - 372/983] was one of the most glorious kings of his time, for his marks and remarkable achievements are there in the realm of al-Isli\m--o you not see the cities which he built, and the canals which he dug, the names which he created, and the things he invented. Well, he used to refer to this region as ‘the seven districts,’ and that is commonly accepted; and this is what we follow since we found no contradiction to it.
The first of the districts as you come from the direction of al-Jibal is al-Sūs, then JundaysābOr, then Tustar, then ʿAskar Mukram, then al-Ahwaz, then Ramhurmuz, then al-Dawraq-these names are in common to the districts and the capitals. The districts have few towns and the boundaries of the region are close together.
p. 405 Al-Sūs is a district on the frontier of al-ʿIrāq and the boundary of al-Jibi\1; here are farms of rice, sugarcane, a considerable amount of sugar is extracted here. Among its towns are: Basinnil, Mattūt, Bayrūt, al-Bidhiln, Qaryat al-Raml, Karkha.
JundaysilbOr is a district founded by Siibūr bin Filrs, and which he named after himself. It reaches the borders of al-Jibi\1; a delightful district. It is said that it was the seat of the kings in ancient times. A considerable amount ofsugar is extracted here. Among its towns are: al-Diz, al-Riinilsh, Bilyūh, Qadhibin, al-Lūr.
Tustar is a district with much fruit, grapes, citrus fruits, most of it being brought to al-Ahwilz and al-Basra. I did not notice any town there, after looking, and therefore we have adduced an objection in the account of it, saying that this is at variance with our canon to the effect that every capital must have towns, just as every general must have soldiers. Now if it should be said, “You have abrogated what you adduced, in the case of Sarakhs," then the answer is that Sarakhs is not referred to as a district, but this is referred to as a district. Names in this district refer to kings.
Al-ʿAskar is an important district, three rivers going around it and through it. The rural district of al-Mashruqiln is here. Among its towns are Jubak, Zaydiln, Sūq al-Thalāthāʾ (Tuesday market), Hubk Dhū Qurtum, Burjiln, Khiln p. 406 Tawq. The market of al-ʿAskar is held on Friday. Khiln Tawq has six villages named after the days of the week, there being a market for each day.
As for al-Ahwaz, when SilbOr built it he made it in two portions, one of which he named for God-may He be praised and exalted——d the other he named after himself; he then brought them both together under one name, and its name was Hurmuzdilrilwashlr (Hurmuzd Ardashir). Later his name was dropped and it remained Dārāwilshlr. Then the Arabs named it al-Ahwilz, and it is the district within which is included what was ravaged and abandoned of the old districts, which are Manildhir al-Kubril, and Nahr Tiril, both laid waste [226/841] by al-Mubarqaʿ. We crossed the district by the Rayyiln canal, and I noticed its
333
THE REGION OF KHUZISTAN
remarkable construction, learning that it connected the Tigris with the River Khūzistan [al-Ahwaz]. I said to the judge ofal-Khūziyya, when I was with him one day in a boat: “What befell them?" Said he, “Al-Mubarqaʿ descended on it when he called on the Negroes and they responded to him, and they did to it what you see." He continued, “It was more splendid than al-Basra, and they say that to this day people dig up money that had been hoarded there, and dishes of brass, and other things." The towns ofal-Ahwaz that I know are: Nahr Tira, Manadhir al-Kubra, Manadhir al-Sughra, Juzdak, Biruh, Suq al-Arba^ʾ (Wednesday p. 407 market), Hisn Mahdi, Basiyan, Shurab, Bandam (Mandam), al-Dawraq, Sana, Jubba. Al-Dawraq is a district that borders al-ʿIraq at the angle. Among its towns are Azar, Ajam, Bakhsabadh, al-Diz, Andabar, Miraqiyan, Mirathiyan.
Ramhurmuz is a district that borders Fars; delightful. The mountains are well-populated, and there is an abundance of date palms, olives, grain. None of it is plain, except a very small part, and there are no sugarcane farms here. The rivers of the region do not reach it, but they have a river away from the others. Among its towns are: Sanbil, Idhaj, Tiram, Bazank, Ladh, Gharwa, Babaj (Bafaj), Kuzuk, all of them splendid and in the mountains.
Al-Sus is a populous capital, a good city; the people desire to do good. There are excellent markets here, superb breads, and flowing waters which turn mills in the area. They have very fine baths, cheap confections, attractive villages, plenty prosperity, superb tilth, marvelous sugarcane; knowledge of God, the Qur>an, the Tradition; literature, the way of the Prophet, and the decisions of the first khalifs. The mosque is perfect in every way, built on rounded pillars. However, they are Hanbalites, and in summer far from good, for then you see houses of prostitution at the doors of the mosque, in the open daylight; it is then you do not witness any reverence for their Readers or their elders, no standing for their preachers, no respect. They pass their time in dancing. Most of the people are Hubbiyya [a Sufi sect]. The inner city is in ruin, and the people live in the suburbs. The city used to have a fortress on a superb elevated position; however, the armies of CUmar waged war on them intensively, and they demolished the defences. The grave of Daniel is in a stream beyond the city; and on the bank of p. 408 the stream opposite the grave is a handsome prayer house. The grave is not known, except that it is the water; and there is a story about it.
Basinna is small but populous; the men and women here weave howdah covers, and spin wool. Here is a stream which they call Dijla, with seven mills on it, built on boats. The mosque is handsome, at the portal of the city in the direction of the river; and the river is distant from the city a bowshot. Two solid fortresses stand here, a place of prayer for the Festival between them.
Bayrūt is large; here are many date palms, and people call it “little Basra." It is said that it was the capital of a district at one time. I saw it from a distance while traveling from al-Bidhan seeking Basinna.
Karkha is a populous fine small town; its market is on Sunday. The drinking water is derived from a river. Over it stands a fortress, and there are orchards here.
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
334
The remaining towns are pleasant and populous. Rivers flow through the entire region.
JundaysābOr was a capital populous and important, an ancient town, and was the metropolis of the region. Now, however, it has been overthrown, the Kurds have taken it over, and tyranny and vice have arisen there. However, it produces much sugar, and I have heard people say that most of the sugar of Khuril.sil.n and al-Jibal comes from there. The inhabitants are Sunnl Muslims. Here are two p. 409 streams, turuz dates are in abundance, important villages, rice, farms, low prices, agricultural products. Here also are jurisprudents, prosperity.
Al-Lor is on the boundary with al-Jibil.l, and it is said to have been added therefrom to this region. Here are turuz dates in abundance. The sugar here is not outstanding. I did not enter the other towns.
Tustar-there is not in the region a better, more fortified, more important town than this. The river flows around it, orchards and palm trees surround it. This is the source ofevery expert in the making ofsilk brocade and cotton. It has gathered within it every variety of thing, is the leading city, and has become famous throughout mankind. It is the city ofwhich it was said that it is a Paradise in which the pigs graze. Do not even ask about its fruits and agricultural products, for to me they were a delight and a pleasure. You see the markets well attended, numerous specialties; people travel thither from the east and from the west. The people have cold water courses that flow underground. However, their mosque is insignificant, the heat here intense, the bridge long, and no access except by it. Many times the stranger loses his way in the markets. On the other side is little development. Their cemetery is in the middle of the town. The mosque is amid the markets among the cloth makers, and at the gate of the town is another cloth market. Near the bridge is a delightful spot in which the fullers are. Anyone who wants to go by boat to al-ʿAskar has to walk about afarsakh. Here are villages-——، what sort of villages are they, without mosques!
Addition/version MS. c
Their gardens are of citron and pomegranate the finest, grapes and pears of surpassing excellence, and dates; it is the garden of Khozistiln, the emporium of Filrs and Khurilsiln. Brocade made here is taken to Egypt and Syria. Its inhabitants are well favoured, for here in summer cold water runs in channels under the ground. However, their mosque is insignificant, the heat here is severe, knowledge scant. The river surrounds it like a fosse. The bridge from the direction of Jundaysabor is long and consists of boats, and from that side there is but little development. The mosque is in centre town near the market of the cloth makers; also, at the gate of the town is a cloth market. The town is surrounded by important villages, but they are without mosques.
Al-ʿAskar: al-Hujjaj bin Yosufhad a young man named Mukram who settled with his army in this place and liked it. So people came thither and it was settled, and hence was called ʿAskar Mukram. It is a capital, cleaner than which
335
THE REGION OF KHUZISTAN
you do not see one in the land ofthe non-Arabs. Fruit is good, markets delightful, plenty of produce; confections are cheap, breads excellent, and the inhabitants have their specialties. There is commerce; they are people of intelligence and understanding; most of them are scholars. You may see them learning in the prayer house up to twilight. However, they have made themselves odious to everyone by their skill in theology, and by their detachment have they offended all of al-Islam; hence preachers and public have rebuked them. There is a weakness here, and its cure is drunkenness; and scorpions kill with their poisons. Moreover the stranger here has no standing. I went in there the time of the morning prayer, and left it in the evening. It consists of two sides, the more populous being the side near al-ʿIraq, and this also has the mosque and most of the markets. Connecting the two sides are two bridges of boats.
The remaining towns are on streams, and in them the turuz dates grow profusely, especially in al-Mashruqanalo you really realize what a place al-Mashruqan is! It is more fitting that Khan Tawq be included in the towns ofal-Ahwaz.
Al-Ahwaz is the metropolis of the region; it is cramped, ugly, and nasty. The people have no religion, no element of humanity. The jurist is not a leader, nor is the preacher wise. The opportunity is never right, the heart never at ease. The stranger there is in confusion, depressed. And living is not a delight there either for the residents. There are bedbugs, fleas, great distress. In the night comes mildew, in the day the heat of the simoom. The inhabitants are constantly watching the north, fearing the south; they suffer scorpions, snakes and tepid water. A people of calamity; a metropolis of vice, poverty, depression. Fruits are brought there from distant places, flour is brought there from afar. Here is an arid place, sterile mountain, dirty market. The soil is briny; their reciter lacks polish, their mosque respect. Their country has no ruler, their jurists no council. They are a people of wrangling and fanaticism, ofindecision and fickleness. You see the people of the town two factions, the followers of the Prophet two parties. However, it is the supply town for al-Basra, the entrepot of Fars and Isfahan; here are superb hostels, excellent breads, and other foods. Here are assembled the silks and the brocades, and thither are carried the goods, the wealth. Here is the supply house, the resources of the merchants, the thriving watering place for every passerby. Its reputation is great among the regions and the metropoles. Its winter is good, and so would the fall be, but for the flies; and so would be the spring, but for the fleas which are like wolves! Still, it is kindly, with clothing for the feeble. It is like al-Ramla, having two sides; however, the mosque and most of the markets are on the side towards Fars, while the side towards al-ʿIraq is an island, behind which is the main branch of the river, just as we mentioned about Fustat in Egypt. Between the two sides is the bridge of Hinduwan, of baked brick, beside which is the handsome prayer house, overlooking the river. ʿAdhud al-Dawla had destroyed the bridge and rebuilt it magnificently with the prayer house, to have it named for himself; however the people refused to call it
p.410
p. 41 1
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
336
anything but the bridge of Hinduwan. On the stream is a number of wheels which the water turns, and they are of a kind called niiCUra [bucket type Persian wheel]. Here also the water flows in raised canals to reservoirs in the town. Some channels flow to the gardens. The main stream flows from beyond the island about shouting distance to a reservoir, remarkably built from the rock, and here it forms a pool. Here is remarkable roiling of water, and the reservoir holds back the flow, dividing it into three streams, which flow to the villages, and irrigate the farms; and they say that were it not for the reservoir al-Ahwaz would not be inhabited, nor would the rivers be of any use. On the reservoir are gates which are opened when the water rises: without them al-Ahwaz would be flooded. You hear the noise of the falling water, and it keeps you from sleeping, throughout most of the year. The rise occurs in the winter since it comes from the rains, and not from the snows. The river al-Mashruqan cuts through the lower part of p. 412 the town, but it is dry most of the year. The water forms a lake in a place called al-Dawraq. Al-Ahwaz is well off with these rivers, and boats come and go and cross there just as at Baghdad. The streams branch off at the upper part of the town, and come together at the lower portion at a place called Karshanan, whence the boats sail to al-Basra. There are some remarkable mills on the river.
Suq al-Arba	(Wednesday market) is on a branch of this river, in two parts,
between them a wooden bridge under which boats pass. The side towards al-ʿIraq is the more populous, and the mosque is there.
Hisn Mahdl is populous; all the streams of the region meet here, then flow into the sea. A fortress is here which Mahdi built. It is a port because of its proximity to the sea, and it has guard houses. The worshippers at the mosque assemble on the bank of the river. Here the roads also meet.
The other towns that are on the streams have an ebb and flow of the tides, have date palms and farms. The most populous part ofal-Ahwaz is that towards Soq al-Arba<a and what is included in that area.
Al-Dawraq is a populous capital in a remote part of the region away from al-ʿIraq, and situated on a river. It has an extensive rural district. The market is large, and there are specialties and agricultural products. The site is attractive. It produces canvas. It is smaller than al-Sūs. The market is dispersed and the mosque is on the edge of it. The drinking water is derived from the river. The pilgrims of Fars and Kirman go there.
MirAthiyAn is in two sections; it has busy markets In each section is a mosque.
MiraqiyAn has an extensive rural district. It is on a river reached by the ebb and flow of the tide. Here are many villages, and excellent lands.
JubbA is an extensive district with populous villages; here are streams, and date palms. Abo ʿAli, leader of the Muʿtazilites, came from here. Some have included ʿAbbadan in this district, whereas it is in al-ʿIraq. Now if it were to be said, however, that we should include it in this region because of coincidence in language, and because there are similarities to it, in this region, in the rhyming p. 413 [of names]--d you not notice that you say ʿAbbadan just as you say BAsiyAn,
337
THE REGION OF KHUZISTA.N
Miraqiyan, al-Bidhan?-the answer to that is that the coincidence in language is not conclusive, since the masses ofal-Basra are Persians, every one of them. And indeed the coincidences of these towns in the ending of their names also have parallels, in the towns near al-Basra, in this respect, for example Badran, Roman, Shiqq ClJthman. If it should be said, “What we said before has greater probability for our argument than for yours, since the region itself conforms in this respect [of the rhyming of the ending], for do you not notice that you say ‘Khūzistan’?" The answer is that this argument should hold true in all cases, and should apply to the other similar situations, so that we would say that Shaman and Sulaymanan also pertain to Khūzistan. And if one were to swallow that notion then it would be said to him, “Then you do not controvert the one who says that ʿAbbadan pertains to the Peninsula of the Arabs, because it has parallels there, such as ClJman, Najran, Samaran." Now, if it is not permissible for us to attribute it to the Peninsula in the light of that reason, you should know that it does not resemble the case of Bidlis when we drew an analogy with Tiflis, as we did not find in Aqūr a place with the same rhyme, but we found in al-Rihab a number of [such] towns and villages.
Ramhurmuz is a large capital, with flourishing markets, and an abundance of agricultural products. Here is a fine mosque, beside which are markets of the finest appearance, which ʿAdhud al-Dawla built; I have never seen more admirable than them in cleanliness and elegance. They have been decorated, ornamented, paved, and covered. Gates have been constructed on the markets and are locked every night; the cloth makers are here, the perfumers, the mat weavers. In the cloth market are excellent commercial hostels. The inhabitants derive their drinking water from a stream and wells, the water of the stream being available by turns to the farmers.
Addition /version MS. c.
[There are] wells, and outside the town streams, from which a channel enters, so that the water is available by turns to the farmers, just as at al-Basra and al-Rayy. There is a waqfhere, and a continuous program of instruction for anyone who will study theology according to the school of the Muʿtazila; and there is a shaykh present under whose direction one studies.
Date palms and orchards surround the city. Here is a library like that in al-Basra, and in fact both institutions were entirely established by Ibn Sawwar. A fee is charged in both of them for anyone who resorts there, obligatory for reading and for copying. However, the library ofal-Basra is bigger, more frequented, and has more books; in this one also there is always a teacher instructing in theology according to the school of the Muʿtazilites. The Oratory of the Festival is at the edge of the town among the houses. This is an attractive town; however, on summer nights they have need of nets, because of the great number ofgnats. The population in the outskirts has diminished, and the ruler has taken possession of the villages.
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
338
I dropped in on the governor here, Abu al-Hasan bin Zakariyyaʾ, who p. 414 had lived in Palestine for a long time. Said he, “I regret leaving that area, and returning to a country so that I cannot see the delight ofmy eye, my native land." And though he begged and besought to be given a part of his lands that were taken from him, to cover his expenses, it would not be given to him. The roads thither are difficult, and there are Bedouin all around; you notice their vile natures and barbarous leaders.
Idhaj is the most important town of the district; its ruler lives by himself. Like Asadawadh it is in the mountains; much snow falls there, and some is carried to al-Ahwaz, and the districts around. The drinking water is from ʿAyn Sha'ab Sulayman (the well of the tribe of Solomon), the farms are watered by rain; there is another source of water also. Water melons and other agricultural products are here aplenty. The town occupies a low-lying site.
Kozok is also in the mountains; it has never ceased to provide grapes; here is an abundance of violet and sweet basil. It is a good town.
Gharwa is among the well-known towns like the settlements we have mentioned.
Ladh is also in the mountains, as are all the towns of this district, from one point of view; from another point of view they are in a ravine.
A Summary Account ofConditions in this Region This is a hot region, the waters are temperate, except the water ofJundaysabor, for, despite its salubrity it is hard. The climate of al-Sos is unhealthy. However, as one approaches the River Dijla [Tigris] on which Baghdad is, it is more healthy. Date palms aplenty are here, no towering mountain, no soft sand except between al-Bidhan and the River Tira. Snow does not fall here, nor does the water freeze, except in the area of Ramhurmuz. Rivers flow through most of the region, and boats travel on all of them. There are few Christians, and not many Jews or Magians. Preachers are here very much in evidence, but p. 415 have little standing. Here also are ascetics, except in al-Ahwaz and in the guard houses; also Sufis, except in al-ʿAskar. Their Qjbla is not correct, especially that of Basinna, and when I returned from there to al-Basra my friends said to me jestingly, “Repeat the prayers you said in Khozistan, for they pray to another
Q_ibla.١١
The various religious schools here: most of the inhabitants of the region are Muʿtazilites. Indeed, all the people of al-ʿAskar [are Muʿtazilite] as well as most of the people of al-Ahwaz, Ramhurmuz, al-Dawraq, also some of the people ofJundaysabor. As for al-Sus and its districts, the people are Hanbalites and Hubbiyya [a Sofl sect]. Half of the people of al-Ahwaz are Shlʿa, and there are many followers there of Abo Hanlfa, among them jurists and Imams and eminent people. In al-Ahwaz are also Malikites.
339
THE REGION OF KHUZISTAN
When I entered al-Sus I sought out the mosque, seeking a shaykh from whom I might hear some of the Traditions. Wearing ajubba [long outer garment open in front, with wide sleeves] of wool, copper in colour, and an apron of the style of al-Basra, I made my way to the Sufi meeting. When I approached them they did not doubt that I was a Sufi, and received me with welcome and greeting, sate me down amongst them, and began questioning me. They then sent a man who brought some food, but I refrained from eating as I had not associated with this sect before that time. So they began to wonder at my abstention, and my refraining from their practices. I wished then that I had had associated with this creed, and thus would have known their rituals and learned their truths. But I said to myself, “this is your opportunity, for this is a place in which you are unknown." Thereupon I opened up to them, and put off the mask of diffidence from my face; then sometimes I would converse with them, other times I would scream with them, then again I would read them the poems. And I used to go out with them to the cells, and attend their convocations, until, by God, they began to trust me, as did the people of the town to the extent I had never intended. I became famous there, visitors sought me out; clothing and purse were brought to me, and I took them and paid them for them completely on the spot, because I was rich; around my middle [with money belt] I had a lot of money. I attended a convocation every day——d what a convocation!——d they used to think that I was becoming ascetic. So people began to stroke by clothes [for a blessing], and proclaim an account of me, saying, “We have never, never, seen a faqir [Sufi mendicant] more deserving than this man." The result was that when I had learned their secrets, and found out what I wanted to from them, I fled them in the calm of the night. By morning I had put a long distance between us. Then when I was in al-Basra one day wearing my [Sufi] clothing, my slave following behind me, a man of the Sufis saw me, and stopped and stared at me, apparently struck at the recognition. But I passed him as if I did not know him. p. 416 Their customs: no one wears the taylasiin except he be eminent. Most of them wear the ridāʾ [loose outer cloak], rectangular in shape. The populace wear scarves and wraps. They are a kindly people. When the Imam says the noon prayer in their mosques the people gather round him, and he finishes praying and says the invocation with them; it is the same in Shiraz. Preachers there wear a qaba and belt, in the manner of al-ʿIrāq. They do not jubilate [say “la ilaha illaʾllah"] after the Friday prayer. The preacher turns his head to right and to left, and lifts his voice in the invocation aftCT the prayers, in the manner ofSyria and Egypt. People enter the baths without trousers. They usually eat rice bread, and ride cattle. They commonly place large water jars in the streets and on the highways between towns, one about everyfarsakh, and sometimes the water must be brought to them from a distance. Their customs are close to those of al-ʿIraq. They choose large stones for their rings, and the best pearls. In all the realm of Islam measures are not to be found truer than the measures of al-ʿAskar; then come those of al-Kofa.
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
340
Commerce flourishes there, because all the sugar you see in the countries of the non-Arabs, and in al-ʿIrāq and al-Yaman, is from there. From Tustar are produced and exported fine silk brocade, howdah blankets, fine [cotton] cloths [like those of Marw], much fruit. From al-Sūs, much sugar, cloth, and silks.
Addition/version MS. c.
... and the finest cloth of cotton, and from al-Sūs comes a silk with which there
is no cloth that can compare. They do not make turbans here, because al-Kofa
pours forth a steady stream of the best.
From al-ʿAskar silk veils, which are taken to Baghdad, very fine durable cloth, fabrics of hemp, scarves, and some of the other things the people of al-Ahwaz use. The curtains of Basinnil, and the howdah blankets of Qurqob are famous. In the district of Wilsit curtains are made on which it is written that they were made of material from Basinnil, and thus are they represented; but they do not compare [with the original ofBasinnil]. In al-Ahwaz wraps are made of silk; they are handsome and the women wear them. In Nahr Tiril large shawls are made. Here are specialties also. There is nothing like the pickles ofJundaysilbūr, or the confections ofthe region, or the silk of al-SOs^xcept in making turbans, as there is nothing to equal the sakh [a fine cloth] of al-Kofa. One ofthe specialties p. 417 also is the grape sugar. And the howdah blankets in Basinna, the fine curtains, the excellent vegetables and aromatic melons of Tustar, the sugarcane of al-Sūs, the dates of Nahr Tira-all are of the highest quality.
There is factionalism in al-Ahwilz, and fighting occurs between the Marushiyon, who are Shlʿa, and the Fadhliyūn who are Sunni; also between the people of al-Bidhan and Basinna; between the people of Tustar and al-ʿAskar. Moreover, between the people of Tustar and al-Sūs there is partisanship on account of the coffin of Daniebon whom be peace. Some said that when the grave of Daniebon whom be peace-was uncovered, the remains were placed in a sarcophagus and carried around to places at which people prayed for water. So, they continued, the coffin was removed far from us here, and then was returned to Tustar, and the people kept it there. We sent them ten leaders as hostages against the time of our returning the coffin to them, [should they lend it to us]. But when they had obtained the coffin they dug this river, built this vault over it, and allowed the water to flow over it. They kept those hostages there; and from that time this intolerance has been between us, and because of this the prestige of our leaders has diminished to this day.
The mann used in the region in weighing meat and fish-ecept in al-Ahwaz—is four ratls; the mann for bread is the Makkan; in al-Ahwaz the mann of Baghdad is used for weighing everything. Their coins, as in the Orient, are of gold, using the diinaqs, every diinaq weighing eight and forty grains--o rice, that is. Every
341
THE REGION OF KHUZISTAN
thousand dirhams weighed in Isfahan is less in Tustar by five and twenty; while the value of a thousand dirhams of Tustar exceeds that of al-Ahwi\z by six dirhams. Every hundred dinars weighed in Qazwln is greater in Tustar by five dirhams and four danaqs. Every hundred dirhams weighed in Khurasan is less in Khozistan by two dirhams. They do not use the qirat [a weight].
The dry measures used are the makkūk, the kurr, the makhtūm, the kaff, and the qafiz. The makkūk of Jundaysabor is three manns and one half, while the kurr is four hundred eighty. The makhtūm of al-AhwilZ is two sac, the sac being three akuff; the qafiz is seven manns of wheat, and their kurr is one thousand two p. 41S hundred fifty manns of wheat, and that would be one thousand ofbarley.
There is not in the non-Arab regions any purer language than that of the inhabitants here. They often blend their Persian with the Arabic, and they say, “Ayna kitab wasla kun, wa ayna kar qut'a kun," and even more attractive. You do not find them speaking in Persian without changing to Arabic; and when they speak in one of the two languages you would not realize they knew the other one well. In their speech is a jingle and an elongation at the end. When they say “listen" they say bibakhshi (excuse me); also for kabad they say khaymal.
The heads of the people of Ramhurmuz are wide and flat; they do not speak clearly, and their language is incomprehensible. Abu al-Hasan Mathar bin Muhammad from Ramhurmuz told us that he had the following account from Mansor bin Muhammad, who had it from Ishaq ibn Ahmad, who had it from Muhammad bin Khalid bin Ibrahim, who had it from Abu ʿAsma, who had it from Ismaʿll bin Ziyad, who had it from Malik al-Quttan, who had it from Khulayd, who had it from Imran al-Maqburl, who had it from Abo Hurayra. Said the Prophet-God’s peace and blessings be upon him: “The worst speech before God is the Persian, the Khūzian is the language of the devils; the language of the people of hell is that of al-Bukhara, and the language of the people of Paradise is the Arabic."
The land-tax ofal-AhwilZ is thirty thousand thousand dirhams; the Perians used to apportion over the entire region a tax of fifty thousand thousand dirhams.
As for distances in this region:
From al-Sos to Qurqob, one stage;
thence to al-Tlb, one stage.
From al-Sos to Basinna, two post stages; thence to al-Bidhan, a like distance.
From Jundaysabur to al-Lūr, one stage; thence to al-Diz, two stages;
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
342
thence to Raykan, one stage;
thence to Kul Bityklln, forty farsakhs of desert;
thence to Karaj Abl Dulaf, one stage.
From Tustar to Qaryat al-Raml, one stage; thence to Basinna, one stage. p. 419 From aJ-ʿAskar to the fortress, one stage;
thence to the other fortress, one stage; thence to Ramhurmuz, one stage.
From aJ-ʿAskar to Tustar, or to al-Ahwaz, one stage each.
From Jundaysabiir to al-Sus, or to Tustar, one stage each, and from Bayriit to al-Sus or al-Bidhan, one stage each.
From al-Ahwaz to Shnrab, two post stages; thence to Mandam (Bandam), one stage; thence to Qasabat al-Dawraq, one stage.
From al-Ahwaz to Suq al-Arbacaʾ, one stage; thence to Hisn Mahdl, one stage; thence to Fam aJ-ʿAdhudl, one stage; at this point you are at the Dijla of al-ʿIrāq.
From Hisn al-Mahdl to Bayan, near a salt marsh, one stage.
You should know that the river of al-Ahwaz, and the Dijla (Tigris), flow into the Sea of China, and between them lies this salt marsh; so the people, in former times, used to travel by the river to the sea, then on their return would come in from the sea to the Dijla, thence to al-Ubulla, and here they would experience danger and discomfort. Then ʿAdhud al-Dawla cut a great canal from the river of al-Ahwaz to the Dijla, a length of four farsakhs, and the route traveled at present is by means of this.
From al-Ahwaz to Ajam, one stage; thence to Azar one stage; thence to Ramhurmuz, one stage.
From al-Ahwaz to al-Dawraq, one stage; thence to a hostel, one stage; thence to Basinna, one stage; thence to Qaryat al-Raml, one stage;
343
THE REGION OF KHUZISTAN
thence to Qurqub, one stage.
There are two other routes here.
From al-Ahwaz to Nahr Tlra, one stage; thence to Nahr aJ-ʿAbbas, one stage; thence to al-Khuziyya, one stage;
then you travel by water to al-Ubulla, a distance of one stage.
From al-Ahwaz to al-Ishaqiyya, one stage; thence to al-Jisr al-Muhtaraq, one stage; thence to Hisn Mahdl, one stage.
From Nahr aJ-ʿAbbas to ʿAskar Abl Jaʿfar, one stage;
then you cross to al-Ubulla, and this is the route over which animals travel. From Ramhurmuz to SanbIl, two stages;
thence to Arrajan, one stage.
From Ramhurmuz to Tayram, one stage; thence to Gharwa, one stage; thence to Bazink (BazIr), two post stages; thence to Idhaj, one stage; thence to al-Diz, one stage; from al-Diz to [al] Dūlab, one stage; and from [al] Ram [Hurmuz] to al-Zutt, one stage.
From Ramhurmuz to Nadah(?) [Badah(?)], one stage; thence to Jisr Jahannam, one stage.
p. 42.
The Region of Fars (Southwest Iran)
Of this region the soils are mines, the mountains wooded, the thorns are the Sarcocolla gum tree. From its goats is derived the renowned bezoar stone. Its supplies of bitumen are well-known. The eight regions [of the non-Arabs] are related to it. Here are date palms, citrus, olives, ribās [currants], cane, and artichoke; walnuts, almonds, locust. Here are made cloaks and silk fabrics; well-made rugs and cloths; admirable garments, draperies, cotton clothing looking like brocade; silk brocade and different kinds ofgarb. Here are the famous parks, the renowned capitals, fine cities such as Fasa and Shaʿab Bawwan; Sabur and Nawbandijan; Darabjird, splendid and renowned. And do not conceal the superiority of SIraf and Arrajan; nor in Istakhr the wonders and the buildings. Jur has been great among cities for its blossoms and fruits; and Sabūr has closely resembled Sughd, and exceeded it in the production of olives, citrus and sugarcane; for here are trees, fruits, rivers.
Fars is a splendid region, excelling with an abundance of agricultural products, a fount of commerce. One day Abu al-Hasan al-MuʾammalI asked me how I found Fars. Said I, “Of the regions I found it most resembling al-Sham (Syria), since it includes all kinds of ftuits, and in it are places of heat, cold, and moderate temperatures. The mountains are forested, inhabited; there is honey, olives, blessings, the like of which I have never seen outside of al-Sham, except in Fars. Nevertheless it is the seat of tyranny and corruption; scorpions abound, the language is barbarous, taxes heavy, some sections are hot, its cold areas bitter. The practices of the Magians are in the open there, and most of its villages have been appropriated."
Fars the son of Tahmurath settled it.
Here is a representation of its form and features. [Map XVII]
We have made Fars six districts and three sections, the first, coming from the direction of Khūzistan being Arrajan, then ArdashIr Khurrah, and then Darabjird, then Shlraz, then Sabor, then Istakhr; the sections are al-Rūdhan, Nlrlz, Khasū.
Arrajan is an important district with plain and mountain and coast; it has an abundance of date palms, figs, olives, with copious revenue and agricultural products. It is told of ʿAdhud al-Dawla that he said: “My aim is to have fame from al-ʿIraq and income from Arrajan." Arrajan was the son of Qarqlsiya bin Fars; he grew angry with his father and left Aqur, and this district was set up for him. I add to it some of the towns of Ardashlr Khurrah, and some others; and if the statement of the one who considered Ramhurmuz as part of Fars is to have force, then these should be added, even though now they have been added to Khozistan. The capital of Arrajan has the same name; among its towns towards the sea are Qustan, Daryan, Mahruban, Jannaba, Sinlz; and in the mountains Joma, Hinduwan.
p. 421
p. 422
ري.
345
THE REGION OF FARS
Map XVII: Fars (see p. 421).
From MS. Sprenger 5—Ahlwardt 6034 by kind permission of the Staatsbibliothek Preussischer Kulturbesitz, Berlin, Orientabteilung.
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
346
Ardashlr Khurrah is an ancient district which Nimrūdh bin Kancan planned; then Slrafbin Fars built it. Most of it extends along the coast. The heat is severe, fruit scarce. The capital is Slraf, and among its towns are: JOr, Maymand, Naband, al-Slmakan, Khabr, Khawaristan, al-Ghundijan, Kuran, Samlran, Zlrabadh, Najlram, Naband Don [lower], Sūrū, Raʾs Kishm.
Darabjird is a splendid district which Darabjird bin Fars settled; formerly the metropolis, the kings used to stay here. Here are many mines, important specialties, excellent climate. The capital has the same name, and among the cities are: Tabastan, al-Kurdiban, Kurram, Yazdikhwast, al-Maskanat, Zumm Shahriyar, Kadrū, Awjln, Ik. It has a section, Nlrlz, with towns: Khayar, al-Murayzijan, al-Madhawan; and the section Khasū, with towns: Robanj, Rustaq al-Rustaq, Furj, Tarum. Among the towns with important rural districts are: Juwaym Abl Ahmad, al-Isbahanat, Sinan, Burk, Azbarah.
Shlraz was not formerly a district, just a city which Shlraz bin Fars built. However, the Muslims colonized it when they occupied the region, and the kings liked it and settled there, so it is now among the administrative centres. It is connected with Istakhr; but I have added many towns to it, and have made it a district, for here is the biggest metropolis; moreover, it has the sovereignty, and the administrative offices are there. Here are many mountains, and equable climate. The capital has the same name. Its towns are: al-Baydhaʾ, Fasa, al-Mass, Kol,Jūr, Karazln, Dasht BarIn,Jamm, Jobak, Jamakan, Kord, Bajja, Hazar, Abak.
Sabūr is a delightful district; and in every garden of it are to be found date palms, olives, citrus, locust, walnuts, almonds, figs, grapes, lotus, sugarcane, violet, jasmine; you see the rivers flowing, fruits within easy reach; villages spread out so that you walk farsakhs under the shade of the trees, just as in Sughd. And every farsakh there is a baker and a greengrocer. The district is close to the mountains; the name of its capital is Shahrastan. Among its towns are: Darlz, Kazarūn, Khurrah, al-Nawbandijan, Kariyan, Kunduran, Tawwaz, Zamm al-Akrad, Junbad [-Malaghan], Khasht.
Istakhr is the most extensive district; it has many towns, its name is great. Istakhr bin Fars settled it, and among its towns are: Harat, Maybud, MaʾIn, al-Fahraj, al-Hlra, Farūq, Sarwistan, Usbanjan, Bawwan Kirman, Shahr-Batiq, Ord, al-Rūn, Khurrama, Dih Ushturan, Tarkhanlshan, Sahah (Sahak), Shababak.
Arrajan is a capital, very well built; many agricultural products; important towns; distinguished people; it has both snow and dates, lemons and grapes. It is a source of figs and olives, and in it are made the choicest syrup, and soap. It is the granary of Fars and al-ʿIraq, the emporium of Khūzistan and Isfahan. A copious stream cuts through the town; a handsome well-attended mosque is on the edge of the markets, having a tall, elegant minaret. The buildings here are of well-joined stone. The market of the cloth makers is here built like the market of Sijistan. The market has gates that are locked every night, the market, in orderly rows, being cruciform in shape. The gates are on four sides, one opposite the other, and you do not see a finer market there than the wheat market. It is a
p. 423
p. 424
p. 425
347
THE REGION OF FARS
clean, nice place in the winter, sunk among the date palms and gardens. The wells are sweet, and no matter what you say, you could not describe the fruits and the fish, the snow and the dates. However, in summer it is hell itself, and the water of the river is salty from vintage time up to the rainy season. You do not see in the country women more coquettish than those here. The town has six gates-Darb al-Ahwaz; Darb Rishahr; Darb Shlraz; Darb al-Rusāfa؛ Darb al-Mayd:ln; Darb al-Kayyalln [supervisors of measures]. It was taken over by ʿUthman bin Abi al-ʿĀsā; the mosque was built by al-Hajjaj.
Joma is a small town; the drinking water is derived from a stream. The name of the rural district is Bala SabOr. Though mountainous it is delightful, resembling the Ghuta of Damascus. It is said that SabOr bin F:lrs used to prefer this place over all the other places he established in Khurasan and KhOzistan; it is there he died and was buried.
Al-Dayrjān is a town ofthe rural district of Rishahr; it is of medium size, and spacious.
Bīrān is a town ofSanbil; it pertained to KhOzistan formerly.
Hinduwān, towards the sea, is in two sections. The mosque and the market are towards Arrajan, the remaining buildings and the fish market being in the other section, towards the sea.
D:lryan has a busy market, an extensive rural district.
Sinlz is half a farsakh from the sea, above Mahruban. It has a long market penetrated by an inlet on which boats ply. The mosque is distant from the market, the administration building opposite to it; there are many palaces.
Mahrobān is on the sea, the mosque on the coast. Water here is scarce. This is the harbour of the district, the emporium of al-Basra. The markets are very fine, and well attended.
Jannaba also is on an inlet; its markets are in alleys. The mosque is in midtown. The drinking water is from briny wells, and ponds. Abo Saʿld and Abo Tahir al-Qarmatl came from here.
Sīrāf is the capital of Ardashlr Khurrah. At the time of its settlement its people preferred it to al-Basra because of the extent of its development, the beauty of its buildings, the elegance of its mosque, the charm of its markets, the affluence of its population, the extent of its reputation; it was at that time the point of access to China, after ʿUmān. It was, too, the entrepot of Fars and Khurasan. In summary, I have not seen in the realm of Islam more remarkable buildings, or more handsome; they are built of teakwood and baked brick. They are towering houses, and one single house is bought for more than one hundred thousand dirhams. The population diminished when the Boyids were in power, for they left for the seashore, and established the capital ʿUman. Then came the earthquake in the year 66 or 67 A.H. (685 or 686 C.E.), which jolted and shook it violently for seven days, so that the people fled to the sea; most of those houses were destroyed and tumbled down, and the event became a lesson for anyone who should ponder it, a warning to anyone who will learn a lesson from
p. 426
p. 427
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
348
it. I asked some of the people, “What did you do so that God took away His clemency from you?" Said they, “Fornication was rife among us, and usury spread among us." Said I, “And have you learned a lesson from what I see before me?" Said they, “No!" Something ignominious has been told me about their women; and I observed that the people ofFars, because of the frequency oftheir whoring, coin sayings about them.
I was told that the people started building, and that the city was returning to what it had been; however, it is the gate of hell, with the intensity of the heat here. Water is brought thither from a distance, and they have a small canal of middling water. Their fruits are few. The town is situated between the mountain and the sea, and around about it is desolate land. However, not far away from it are date palms.
Zlrabadh is at the very boundary across from Kirman. It is on the sea, with a stronghold than which I have never seen any more remarkable. The drinking water is from scant wells, and nothing better to drink is to be had here. Here is a gate which is the prerogative of the amir. Whenever a well dries up they move to another.
Najlram is also on the coast, has two mosques. The vestibule of one of them was excavated from the rock, and beside it is a market, outside of the town. The drinking water here is from wells and ponds which are filled by the rain.
Karkam is populous; the mosque is on a small hill at the end of the market. One ascends to it by wooden steps.
Kariyan is small, but its rural district is populous. Here is a temple of fire [Zoroastrian] to which the people attach great importance, and they carry fire from it to distant places.
Raʾs Kishm is small; there is an extensive market with the mosque in it, to which you ascend by steps.
Sūrū is at the very boundary of Kirman; coastal, and small. However, it began to develop because the exports of CUman are carried there, and the caravans of Kirman begin there. The people drink the water which comes from the mountains, and it collects in one place. When it stops they dig that place about five cubits, and sweet water emerges for them.
Darabjird is a delightful capital with a fortified inner city. Here are gardens, date palms, snow, and a number of different kinds of things. The markets are attractive, the climate equable; they have wells and canals. In the middle of the area is the Qubbat al-Mūm؛ya' (dome of naphtha) and a hill on which the mosque stands. Some of the markets are in the inner city, the remainder in the suburbs. The city is one continuous settlement. The cloth market is like a hostel, with two gates; the inner city has four gates, and the houses are spread over a farsakh. On the Qubbat al-MOmiya' is an iron gate, and a man used to be appointed to take care of it. Then when the month of Mihramah [seventh month of solar Persian year, beginning of autumn] came, the mayor, the judge, the postmaster, and the associate judge ascended; the keys were produced, the
p. 428
349
THE REGION OF FARS
gate was opened. Thereupon a naked man would enter and collect whatever amount had oozed that year, and it would not amount to a rati, according to what I heard from one ofthe associate judges. It would be put into a container, sealed, and sent with a number of the elders to Shlrllz. The spot would then be washed, and any of the material that would be seen on the man's hands-for it is only like paste in that water, the pure being found only in the treasuries of the kings.
Furj is not a large town; it has, however, a mosque and a bath incomparable in the region. It has many agricultural products. In the middle of the town is a fort on a small hill. Water is brought from some distance away.
Burk is in a depression, two farsakhs from the mountain. The mosque is beside the market, handsome and clean. The drinking water is derived from canals.
Juwaym Abl Ahmad is among the major cities. The width of its rural district is ten farsakhs, and the mountains enclose it. It is altogether covered with date palms and gardens. The drinking water is obtained from canals, and a small stream beside the market. Between the mosque and the market is a long alley. The mosque is handsome, stands on elevated ground, and one ascends to it by five steps; in the middle of it is a cistern which is filled by the rainwater, and each day the necessary amount is released from it. It is an elegant mosque.
Rustllq al-Rustllq is small, its market not large enough to merit mention. p. 429 However, its rural district is fourfarsakhs each way, all ofit covered with gardens, waters, trees. The drinking water is from a river that flows thither.
Tllrum is on the very border of Kirmlln; the mosque is some distance from the market. The drinking water is obtained from the branch of a stream that flows thither. The area has gardens and date palms, and produces much honey.
Nlrlz is large; the mosque is beside the market; the drinking water is derived from canals; the rural district is twenty farsakhs each dimension.
I did not enter the remaining towns, but I was told that they are distinguished, agreeable, spaciously planned.
Shlrllz is the metropolis of the region; a filthy, cramped, newly founded town. The language here is crude, customs outlandish; there is no dependable leader, not even one wide street. The learned man is not refined, even the best people are sodomites. The merchants are licentious, the rulers tyrannous. People mill around in the markets, they are so narrow. Most of the people say one thing but do another. You may see them entering the baths naked without wraparounds, they bump their heads on the bay windows [because ofnarrowness of streets]. The Magians are not the only people who have no sense of shame: the wearer of the taylasan does not respect himself. I have seen wearers of the taylasan drunk, even beggars and Christians wearing it. The houses ofprostitution are for everyone to see, the practices of the Magians are common. You cannot hear the sermon from the shouting of the beggars; in the cemeteries are the meeting places of the profligates. On the festivals ofthe unbelievers they decorate the markets. Heavy taxes have been laid on stores. The outsider may not enter
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
350
unless he has a pass, the insider and the passerby are held prisoner. Living is difficult there, the land tax is doubled. They have not tasted the pleasantness of justice, nor walked the right path. Their farms are watered with leather buckets, so grapes and figs are dear; good bread you do not find. From the lowness of the balconies they are in trouble. It is not possible for two beasts of burden to go side by side in one market. They are a people of derision and hypocrisy. However, the climate is equable, comfortable in the summer and in the winter; the water is light if you drink from what flows. Moreover the water of the wells is sweet, and p. 430 is close to the surface for irrigation. They are a people of prosperity and trade, with compassion for the strangers. They have specialties, handicrafts, intelligence, and subtlety; courtesy, charity, beauty. Scholars and notables merit praise; and there would be a valid chain of tradition were it not that the person taking dictation and the person giving it speak ungrammatical Arabic. There are many Sufis, and gatherings of readers. They assemble at dawn on Friday, and recite the entire Quran with splendour and beauty. And a mosque, incomparable in the eight regions, is in glory on Friday; it is on pillars after the style of al-Masjid al-Aqsa. Here are the highest administrative offices; and for the people Naysabur [nearby] is like a house ofhospitality, a shabistan. Foods are clean, as is the harisa, but roasted foods are not. It is famous for its dresses, cloaks, and hospital.
There are eight gates: Bab Istakhr; Darb Tustar; Darb Bandastanah; Darb Ghassan; Darb Silm; Darb Kuwar; Darb Mandar; Darb Mahandar. This city is like Damascus in extent, and in the narrowness of the houses; like al-Ramla the building is with stone; it is like Bukhara in filth. The mosque is in the markets, at one side of it the clothiers' market, and the hospital at some distance from it: this has a splendid waqf, fine medicaments, skilled doctors. In Isfahan is another mosque more frequented than this. Bab [gate] Istakhr is like the gates of Mina in Makka, and waters flow past it that are not clean; nor is the water of their wells light. The finest spot there is Bab Istakhr and Bab al-Jamiʿ; the lightest of their waters is that of the canal that flows from Juwaym and enters through the palace of ʿAdhud al-Dawla. The most remote mountain from it is only a farsakh away, and the closest firewood to it is a post stage away. ʿAdhud al-Dawla had added an extensive, spacious quarter to it, with excellent markets, but it has been abandoned.
Addition/version MS. c
Here are centres of administration, industries, specialties, scholars, mysticism, and elegant manners. Here is a distinguished mosque, well attended, with sessions of scholars, readers of the Qurʾān, meetings of communities every day. Here too is the palace of ʿAdhud al-Dawla, the like of which is not to be seen in the possession ofany monarch; in it are gathered together everything from dates to snow. The buildings of the inhabitants are of stone after the manner of Palestine. The mosque is in the markets, built on rounded columns and vaulted arches, and it resembles the mosques of Syria. Here too is a hospital like that at Isfahan, in it equipment, physicians, attendants, food, the like of which I have
351
THE REGION OF FARS
not seen in any country. The capital has eight gates: Darb Istakhr; Darb Sabaq; Darb Bandilstilnah; Darb Ghassiln; Darb Silm; Darb Kuwiln; Darb Mandar; Darb Mahandar. The most extensive place there is Bilb Istakhr, resembling the gates of Minil at Makka; the finest place there is by the mosque. The lightest of their waters is that from the channel of Juwaym, which enters the palace of ʿAdhud al-Dawla. The most remote mountain from it is only afarsakh away, and the closest firewood is a post stage away. ʿAdhud al-Dawla had begun to extend the city, and developed two splendid quarters there, with their markets. Now, however, these have fallen into disuse, and the city at present resembles Bukhilril.
Kurd Fanna Khusraw: Fanna Khusraw is ʿAdhud al-Dawla, and he planned a city about half a farsakh from Shlraz, digging thither a large canal led from a distance of one stage away, spending an enormous sum of money on it; it is the one that flows at the lower end of his palace. Beside it he laid out a garden about a farsakh in width. He transferred to the city the woolworkers, the silkmakers, the brocade manufacturers, so that all barrakan [a fine cloth] is made there today. Do you not notice that the name of the town is written on the cloth? There the officers occupied beautiful houses and fine pieces of property. He established a yearly festival for them when they gathered there for pleasure and recreation. Now, however, the town has diminished after his death; it is going to ruin, and its market is in disuse.
As for Fasa-there is not in the region a people more delightful, upright, and good; no better fruits. There is a large inner city, in which is the market, built entirely of wood; the mosque is in the market, built of brick, bigger than the mosque of Shlraz, and with two courtyards after the style of the mosque of the City of Peace [Baghdad]. Between the two courtyards runs a portico. You may say anything you like about the excellence of this town and its products; and there is much building with cypress wood here, such as you see in the country of the Romaeans.
Nasa, which people call al-Baydhaʾ, is a tidy, elegant, good town, in the other direction. There is a handsome mosque in it, and a shrine whither people repair.
Dasht Bll.rln is a town which has no rural district, no gardens, no stream, no splendour. The people drink from scant water supplies.
Bajja is large, amidst the mountains; the buildings are of stone, the mosque in the market. The width of its rural district is two stages. Snow falls here.
Hazar is small, with an extensive rural district. The drinking water is derived from channels at the surface of the ground.
Kol is populous; the mosque is among the [markets of the] clothiers and the butchers and the bakers. In the other direction is a public square. The drinking water is from a stream.
JOr is a good, pleasant, attractive, spacious, elegant town; it is the source of roses and delightful specialties. Here is a solid, tall minaret. Along with that, it is a fortified town, in the middle of it a tall, well-kept citadel. Its rural district
p. 431
p. 432
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
352
is about a short stage in length; its villages encircle it round about. The drinking water is derived from a stream, and from clean canals. It is truly a recreation ground, with its houses so well arranged; along with that it is renowned in the East and in the West for its spices. In Persian its name used to be “Kūr," which corresponds to the words, “the grave;" so when ʿAdhud al-Dawla went out there it used to be said, “the king is in Kūr raft," meaning that the king had gone to the grave. He disliked that, and changed its name to the better one it now is, calling it Biriizabadh (Firiizabad), meaning “for perfect government."
Shahrastan is the capital of Sabūr; it used to be a developed, well populated, fine city, but it has now fallen into disorder, its outskirts have been destroyed. However, it provides an abundance of produce, and is the source of a variety of specialties. It is a land of excellent citrus and essences, sugarcane, olives, grapes. Prices are low, there is a plenitude of dairy products. It is really a delightful place, with gardens, and copious springs. The houses of prayer are well kept, the baths are good, the hostels many. Here is asceticism and knowledge, snow, and every possible kind of fruit. Its gardens have been made fragrant with the scent of jasmine. Dates and figs are together there, as is to be found the remarkable carob. The buildings here are of stone and mortar. The mosque is outside the town amidst the gardens, handsome and delightful. The city has four gates: Bab Hurmuz; Bab Mihr; Bab Bahram; Bab Shahr; around it is a trench. The river flows all around the capital, and is crossed by bridges. At the edge of the town is a fortress named Dunbula, in front of it a house of prayer. In the middle of the town is another house of prayer, tiled, in which is a black stone; in the centre of it is a mihrab, where, some say, the Prophet-God’s peace and blessings be upon him-prayad. Here also is the prayer house of al-Khidhr, on whom be peace. Close to the fortress is a pre-Islamic jail, its walls of marble. The town is situated at the foot of a mountain, and it has two sections, both having gardens, trees, villages. Outside the town is a large bridge, which, while I was there, was closed. Here is a market the people call “al-ʿAtlq" (the ancient), but it is in disorder. The town has been ravaged, the population diminished, the people now being few in number. Kazaron has taken over its status; along with that, their water is disagreeable. Everyone there is pale and sick, and there is not an important scholar in it.
Darlz is a small town, with a fine market, and many linen weavers.
Kazariin is populous, large; it is the Damietta of the Persians, and that because the linen cloth made there with embroidery resembles the very fine linen of Shata [in Egypt]. If this sort of cloth is made of cotton, it is made and sold here, except what is made in Tawwaz. Here on every side are castles, gardens, date palms, extending from the south to the north. There are substantial cambists in this city, a large busy market, agricultural products, fruits, buildings, trees, splendid houses. The mosque is on an eminence to which one must ascend. The markets and the merchants' establishments are below, for ʿAdhud al-Dawla raised a building there in which he assembled the cambists, and the income from
p. 433
p. 434
353
THE REGION OF FARS
it for the ruler, every day, is ten thousand dirhams. In the town the cambists have secure handsome mansions. The rural districts of Sijistan resemble this rural district-all of it farms, continuous fortifications, date palms. There is no sufficient stream here, only canals and wells.
Addition/version MS. c
The marketplace is hot, palaces remarkable. Here ʿAdhud al-Dawla had built a great edifice with four gates, within it another structure in which these cloths were sold, and the income every day amounted to ten thousand dirhams. Most of the houses and the mosque are on an eminence to which one must ascend: the markets including the merchants’ market are below. In the rural area here are cultivated fields of flax. There is no stream, just wells and some insufficient channels.
Khurrah, a celebrated town, is at the top of a mountain; an abundance of date palms. The river flows below the town. It is a source of dates and natif [a sweetmeat].
Al-Nawbandijan is a pleasant town, renowned and important; and ʿAyan, the palace of Abu Talib, adorns it. Here is the mosque, the waters, the garden; and twenty springs gush out at every place. Markets are large, busy, attractive; here are grapes, dates, bitter orange, pomegranates. Twofarsakhs distant is Shaʿb Bawwan. As a stopping place the city is praised with a number of appellations. It is in a plain, but close to the mountains; and I observed that the people had added to the mosque, at its older section. However, their Imam is ignorant, their judges but two. This is what we know ofJadida Bandijan, where the people do not give thought to whatever may be about to ensue.
Khawrawadhan is small, but populous and friendly. Living there is pleasant; do you not notice how it has embodied the two words for “ease" and “building"? A busy market is there, and the mosque is well frequented. Agricultural products and trees are here; and streams penetrate it, so that some of the stores are on them.
Junbad Mallaghan is a town in the midst of palms. It has a long market, and a delightful mosque to which one ascends by stairs; it is beside the market, and there are no other buildings around it. The drinking water is derived from canals, and in the town are cisterns. The town is at the boundary in a plain below the mountains. Mallaghan is a village, in ruin, at the edge of Arrajan.
Kunduran is large, in it a fortress wherein dwells the ruler. The drinking water is from rain water and from wells; the mosque is some distance from the market.
Tawwaz is small in size, great in name, because of the cloths that are made there of linenalo you not notice that they are called “Tawwazi"? Most of this kind of cloth is made in KazarOn but these are more skillfully and handsomely made. A large river flows beside the town, and between the mosque and the market is an alley. The town is situated far from the mountains.
p. 435
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
354
Khasht is in the middle of the mountains; it has an extensive rural district. Its citadel is well known, its market well frequented. The drinking water is derived from a large stream.
Zamm al-Akrad has a rural district and a stream; it is among the mountains, with gardens, dates, fruits, agricultural products.
Istakhr is an ancient capital, mentioned in the writings, and renowned p. 436 among mankind. Its name is great, important its record. The government offices were here originally; and even though it is the primary city at the present time, the population is light, the site is small. I have compared it to Makka, because it has two branches, and two mountains touch it. The mosque is in the markets, in the manner of the mosques of al-Shllm (Syria); they are on rounded pillars, on the top of each pillar [the image of] a cow; and some say that in olden times this was a temple of fire [Zoroastrian]. The markets surround the mosque on three sides; the middle of the town is somewhat like a valley. Over Bab Khurasan is a remarkable arch, and a fine garden thereby: from that direction the river comes. The buildings here are of clay. The people have drinking spots near the river, and cisterns in the town; and there is not much water in the upper portion ofthe town. The waters here are not healthy, as they flow over rice farms. Here are lots of grains, pomegranates, agricultural products. Just the same, the people are stupid.
Harat is a small town; the mosque is here; small stores, few houses. Most of the markets and the buildings are in the suburbs, and a large stream cuts through here. The city has one gate. Surrounding everything are fine gardens with excellent apples, olives, and other fruits. However, the water here is distasteful, and it is said that their women feel the rut when the sorb trees bloom, just as cats rut.
Jarmi'l. is a large town with a busy market, the mosque close to it. The market p. 437 has two gates. Their drinking water is from canals, easily seen at the surface of the ground.
Dih Ushturan is small, a village near it; here is a mosque with a tall minaret, standing in a small market. The stream flows under the town, and around it are pleasant gardens.
Bawwi'l.n is an extensive rural district, amidst the mountains; a stream cuts through it so it has two sections; no gardens.
Tarkhanlshan is small, the width of its rural district about a stage. The drinking water here is from a stream.
KOrd is populous, source of walnuts, fruits; in the mountains. The drinking water here is from a stream.
Mihrajanawadh has an extensive rural district; the drinking water is from streams.
MaʾIn is on the main road to Isfahan; populous, has abundant fruit.
Sarwistan has the mosque in the middle of the town. It is mountainous; and the water canals here are visible [i.e., at the surface of the ground].
Sahah (Sahak) is small; they are a good people, with kindness for the stranger, and skill in copying the Quran.
355
THE REGION OF FARS
Kathah is on the edge of the desert; cold is severe, fruits few.
Khurrama has an extensive rural district; prices are low, there is a fortress. The drinking water here is from canals, and a stream flows underground.
Abarqiih is fortified; the buildings are close together: a large population, an excellent mosque.
Farca is close to Harilt prices are low.
Karah is like Harilt; but I did not put in sequence the towns of this region. Jarmaq is the most fertile of these towns, has the lowest prices, the most trees. It is on the desert main road.
Barm is on a plain, with a rural district irrigated from wells; it is fortified, having many castles.
Ord has a large fortress, populous suburbs. It is called “al-Har," and is counted among the towns of Isfahiln.
Al-ROdhan belonged to the districts of Kirmiln, and consisted of three towns—UnilS, Adhkiln, Abiln. Unils remained on the very border, its inner city in Kirmiln, so as to justify the boundaries of the two regions, and straighten the border. This region was drawn straight, and settled in these parts from this side, in Isfahiln from the other side: most of the districts of Istakhr remained between them. Over the capital of al-Rodhān is a fortress, guarded by eight gates: Bilb UnilS; Bllb Blrwa; Bilb Khawr Mardilwiidh; Bilb Nasrln; Biib Mihmiln; Bilb Shlrilz; Bllb Kaykhur; and the eighth, Bilb Milyafunil. When I saw it, it was closed. Here is a fine, delightful mosque to which one ascends by wide pebbled steps, and all their houses of prayer are elevated. There are many shoemakers and Muʿtazilites. Their baths are dirty. Here are fullers and weavers. Around the town are fine gardens. The cemeteries are on raised ground, with remarkable domes. Here is an abundance of dairy products, numerous canals, some of which enter the town. Here is a spring in the waters of which people seek to be cured. On the walls are battlements; no suburbs; a scant population. The sands surround it.
Addition/version MS. c.
The baths are in very poor condition. The gardens are pleasant, prices are low; and I have not soen in the territories of the non-Arabs more handsome burial grounds than theirs. Here too is a number of water channels. On the fortress of the town are battlements that extend all the way around. The town does not have suburbs, for the population diminished and the sands have blown to surround it. The villages resemble Sil.wa. Here much cloth is made, in the style of that of Bamm, but it is not of good quality.
A Summary Account of Conditions in this Region Addition/version MS. c.
For my part, I settled in this region for about two years, and I entered it quite a number of times; I traveled over the areas in it of great heat and great cold, also
p. 438
p. 439
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
356
the areas of moderate climate. I have, moreover, considered what Ibrahim bin Muhammad al-Farisl and others have said about it. I have also asked questions about it ofpeople experienced in the matter. It is not possible for me to examine thoroughly its characteristics, and to treat of all its conditions exhaustively, for fear the book would grow too long.
You should know that in Fars are cold areas in which the trees do not bear fruit because of the severity of the cold, and agriculture does not flourish; for example al-Ord, al-Riin, al-Ruhnan, and the surroundings oflstakhr. Then there are hot areas, in which sleep is not possible during the day, because of the intensity of the heat; for example Slraf and Arrajan, and the area between these two. There is moderateness between the two extremes, and in the territory there; for example, Shlraz and its towns, and the surroundings of Sabiir. Snow is to be had in all the region, being brought from near and far. Most of it is in the mountains. Most of the region is forested, the agricultural land being scarce. Here is equable climate; delightful parks, strong citadels, many marvels, wondrous specialties, important mines, delicious fruits. There are more Magians here than Jews, and Christians are few. Lepers are rare; but I have never seen a town with more one-eyed people than KazarOn. Paralytics abound in Shlraz.
There is much activity here on the part of the followers of the Tradition, and the followers of Abo Hanlfa-peaea be upon him-ara many. The DawOdites hold classes and councils; they are in the majority, taking over the judgeship and the administration. ʿAdhud al-Dawla used to consider that of the three sects the most jurists were Muʿtazilites. On the coasts are many Shiʿa.
Among their customs: when they say the afternoon prayer every day the scholars sit with the populace until evening, similarly after early morning prayer until forenoon. On Fridays they assemble elsewhere. Shlraz had a superb mosque, and SOfis here are numerous; they glorify God in their mosques aftcr the Friday prayer, and they face the pulpit in the prayers for the Prophet-God’s peace and blessings be upon him. The call to prayer is done in the presence of everyone by p. 440 all, together without chanting; and no one bears witness except a person of good repute. The populace wears black clothing; not wearing wool, but frequently wearing the taylasan; they also build up their turbans. In Shlraz the wearers of the taylasiin do not command respect, that going only to the wearers of the durrāʿa. As scholars are exalted in the Orient, the scribes are exalted here. Sellers of cooked meat have shops away by themselves.
The buildings here, when the stones are carefully laid, are good looking, even if the workmanship is poor. One day I sat with one of the builders-I mean in Shlraz-while his fellow workers were chiseling with crude picks; the stones they were using were the thickness of brick, and when they had a smooth one they would set it up, draw a line on it, and cut along the line with the pick. Sometimes the stone would break, and when it broke evenly they would set it up on its edge.
357
THE REGION OF FARS
So I said to them, “If you used wedges you would cut the stones square;" I described to them the method of building in Palestine, and discussed some questions in construction. Said the foreman to me, “You are an Egyptian." Said I, “No, rather a Palestinian." Said he, “I have heard that you people flute stones just as wood is fluted." Said I, “Yes indeed!" Said he, “Your stone is soft, and manageable for your workers." I noticed that they had some amazing achievements, and a dexterity and a proficiency that I never saw in the other regions; for example Raʾs al-Sikr, Jisr (bridge) Dakhwldh, and Jisr Abl Talib, built in this era: no builder in al-Sham or AqOr would succeed in producing their like. Most of their mosques are on pillars. It is not possible to tarry in the inner rooms of the baths, because of the heat. I heard one of my father's--aea be on him-workers say that Abu al-Faraj al-ShlrazI made the same blunder in the baths which he built in Jerusalem, by putting the fire under one ofthe inner chambers. However, it is not as he said. Rather, he saw that the practice of al-Sham in this matter differed from the practice of Fars; he accordingly made some of the chambers according to the manner of his own region, and the remaining ones according to the manner of al-Sham. People seldom wear trousers [in the baths]. Sometimes women are in charge of the bathhouse. Rubble is thrown in one place only. The dead they carry head foremost, the men walking in front of the funeral, the women behind. In Khozistan they walk on both sides, playing the pipe and the drum, at funerals, and in the cemeteries. Unknown completely in the non-Arab regions is the practice of going to the cemetery to read the Quriin right through; the people merely assemble for condolences for three days in the houses of prayer. They commonly wear shoes and sandals, with the wearing side softened somewhat, since they are dry. They say the tariiwih twice, letting the youth lead. They celebrate with the Magians the festival ofNayrOz [New Year's Day]; while entertainments and houses of prostitution are open and licensed in ShlrilZ.
Addition/version MS. c.
In the region is a number of doctrinal schools, among them Hanafites, Shafiʿites, Dil.wOdites, Muʿtazilites, Hanbalites, and Shl^. You do not see Dawfldites throughout the region, as most of them there fill the government offices; they hold their own assemblies, doctrinal sessions, and express formal legal opinions. However, the most prevalent usage follows the school of the adherents to Tradition, and the iqama is recited separately, one person after another. Most of the Shlʿa are in Arrajan, and there is no one system of reading the Qurʾān which they prefer over others. Preachers here command no respect. Sufism is factious in Shlraz. In the region are customs, some attractive, some repulsive. For example, late into the forenoon, in the mosque in Shlraz, they assemble in study groups whether it be for study of thefiqh (jurisprudence), or for dhikr [invocation and praise of God], or for reading the Qurʾan. On Yawm "Arafa [the day when the pilgrims visit Mount ʿArafil.t near Makka], the attendants of the Sharif (high born) among them attend the prayers, as do also the plebeians; and when they
p. +41
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
358
have said the afternoon prayers they disperse, ending the period between the two prayers in reading the QurJiin, in praying, and in glorifying God. They do not chant the adhiin (call to prayer) from the pulpit; they exclaim Alliihu akbar (God is most great) after the Friday prayer, just as is done in Syria; and they hold sessions, such as we have described, in the mosque, following the afternoon prayer, and that at sunset. Most of the buildings here are of stone. They do not mind showing themselves in wool and wearing black clothes clearly made from the wool. They screen the courtyard of the mosque at Shlraz, just as at al-Basra and Misr. As for the repulsive practices here, the customs of the Magi are widespread among them, and houses of fornication in Shlraz are very much in evidence; these are contracted for and frequented just as the public baths are. Good standing and honour are accorded to scribes and to the wearers of the dnrraʿa. They carry the dead head foremost, the people except for the women, walking before the bier. People play the pipe and the drum at cemeteries and at funerals just as is done in Khuzistan. They go into the public baths here without trousers. Women superintend the bathhouses here, just as in Isfahan.
I noticed beggarly fellows among shops in the markets, and drivers following their asses, and they were wearing the tay/asiin! It is here the attire of the weaver, the cupper, and the rustic.
Their reckoning is according to the months of the Persians, the first being Farwadin [Farwardln] Mah, then Ardibahisht, Khurdadh, Tir Mah, Murdadh, Shahrlr [Shahriwar], Mihr, Aban, Adhar, Day, Bahman, Asfandarmudh. For every day of the month on which there is official business there is a name, just as there is Ayyam al-Jumaʿ [Fridays] in the other regions. This begins Hurmuz, p. 442 then Bahman, Ardibahisht, Shahrir, Asfandarmudh, Khurdadh, Murdadh, Daybadhar, Adhar, Aban, Khawr Mah, Tlr, Jūsh, Daybamihr, Mihr, Sarūsh, Rashn, Farwadln, Bahram, Ram, Bad.
As for commerce: Arrajan produces very fine syrup, excellent soap; figs, olives; towels; Kandakiya cloths [coarse wool]; handling also Barbahar [precious Indian goods]. From Mahrūban, fish, fruits, superb waterskins. From S!n!z--clhs resembling embroidery; and sometimes linen is brought there from Egypt, though most of what is worked here at present is from what the people grow there themselves. From Slraf—towels, pearls, veils of linen, balances; and they handle Barbahar. From Darabjird, everything of any value in cloth of top, inferior, and medium quality, also everything in the line of carpets; and mats like those of ʿAbbadan, finest carpets, needleworked curtains, many aromatic seeds, dates, syrup, finest jasmine. From Furj--cloths, rugs, curtains; fine syrup, aromatic seeds, linen. From Tarum-syrup, dates, waterskins, bottles, fine leather buckets, large fans. From Jahram-rugs, curtains, howdah rugs very well made. From Shīrazalresses of barrakiln clothwhich is made no place else-and munayyar fabrics with which there is nothing to compare for durability, fineness, and beauty; superb cloaks; made here also is silk, and brocade, embroidery, and clothing. From Fasa-silk clothing exported to afar, very fine superb dresses,
359
THE REGION OF FARS
howdah blankets, rugs, towels; munayyar fabrics like those ofIsfahlln; variegated cloths; precious hangings; superior carpets; coverlets of silk dyed in safflower; tables; tents; scarves of Sharllbiyya cloth, and other things.
In SabOr ten oils are produced-violet, water lily, narcissus, palm oil, lily of the valley, iris, myrtle, marjoram, citron, bitter orange. Here is produced also the bitter orange, with many other fruits, walnuts, olive oil, citron, sugarcane, and willow wood. The oils are sent to far away, the fruits to the metropolis. From KazarOn^mbroidered cloths, the same from Tawwaz and Dariz and those areas, also dabiq [a cloth], and . velvet scarves: these are carried to the far corners of the eight [non-Arab regions], and between these fabrics and those called Shatawiyya there is a great difference. From Jor and Kol, incomparable rose water, and much clothing. From Istakhr-rice and foodstuffs. From al-Rodhan-teloths like those made in Bamm, and leather even better than that of Tripoli; also waterskins and sandals.
There is absolutely nothing in Shlraz to compare with the CUmarl plums, barrakan cloth and munayyar fabrics, and the syrup of Arrajan. Here is a tree like a thorn tree, and its fruit is Sarcocolla gum; and the same is in the areas around SabOr, where fine boots also are made. From Darabjird: dates; salt of naphtha, and of all colours. In the stream here is a boneless fish. In the mountains ofNirlz there is Sarcocolla, also; from here, too, are derived whetstones, and magnesium stones. And in the districts of Shlru-sweet basil, its leaf like the leaf of lily of the valley, its inside like the narcissus; here too is a cucumber with a thorn like that of the porcupine. Saffron grows here, and mountain almond. In Fasa grows a very fine fig; also remarkable cypress, and a rare quince.
Here are sources of bitumen in Darabjird, and in Arrajan is also another source. In Nlrlz are iron mines, and a white clay with which youngsters write on their slates; also a black clay used for seals. Between Shlru and SabOr much assafetida is found.
Addition/version MS. c
From the mountains of Nlrlz, and the districts around SabOr and Arrajan is derived the Sarcocolla, a thorn plant that spreads over the ground, the flower of the Sarcolla resembling that of wormwood
In Nlrlz are iron mines, and a white clay with which youngsters write on their slates, and with which people whitewash their houses; also assafetida in abundance. Saffron grows in the temperate areas of the region, and in Fasa, remarkable cypress trees. In Nlrlz corundum is found, also magnesia; at Jarmaq and at BarqOh, excellent vitriol.
Marvels here: on the outskirts ofArrajan is a fire that burns at night and smokes during the day. Water emerges from wells in the mountains of Fasa, pouring from the mountain as from a teat; below is a hole in which gathers what benefits a person desiccated by the wind. Here are waters that if a man should drink, will purge him as a medicine would. Here also is a talisman, and when disease
p. 443
p. 44
360 THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS appears in an animal it is brought to that place, walking on the ground around it once. Then it sleeps on the ground, with its belly on the talisman, and very soon either dies or is cured. Afarsakh from Istakhr is Malʿab (the stadium of) Sulayman, to which one ascends by handsome stairs cut in the rock. Here are black pillars, and statues in niches, and remarkable constructions like the theatres of al-Sham. Below it is a spring ofwater, anyone drinking of it, it is said, goes away from it with a hangover lasting forty days. Between the pillars are the baths and the prayer house of Sulayman. When a man sits in this stadium, the villages and the farms are all before him, as far as the eye can see.
ʿAdhud al-Dawla dammed the river which is between Shlraz and Istakhr with a huge wall, setting the foundations in lead. The water formed a reservoir behind it, and rose. On both sides he built ten mill wheels, as we described in our account of KhOzistan, under each wheel a millstone, and this is still among the wonders of Fars. Moreover, he built a town there, and carried the water by canals to irrigate three hundred villages.
Addition/version MS. c.
... [also,] a Persian water-wheel (noria) to turn a mill, and on each side he cut scallops from which the water would fall down with full force on the lower parts of the waterwheels, and cause them to turn; and in those parts that turned were chambers that would be filled with water. Then when they turned they would spill out the water into a channel running to three hundred villages. He built at this place a splendid city, with excellent public baths and a handsome mosque.
In this rural district are apples, some sweet, some sour. At Sabiir is [the statue of] a servant made of black stone, garbed in a loincloth; something is written on his upper arm in Persian. It stands in the middle of the road, its waist nine spans, its height a fathom and a cubit.
A farsakh from al-Nawbandijan is a likeness of Sabūr, at the mouth of a cave; he is wearing a crown, and at the base are three leaves of green. The length ofthe instep of his foot is thirteen spans, from his head to his feet, eleven cubits. Behind it stands an expanse of water without limit or outlet, and a violent wind emerges from there. At afarsakh from the gate Bab Shahr [of Sabor] is a cistern from which water issues, then splits into streams; it is pure and limpid as cold water. It is called Sariishlr. In the village of ʿAbd al-Rahman there is what resembles Biʾr Ayyūb (Job's Well) in Jerusalem.
Addition/version MS. c.
... a well, some fathoms deep, dry as a rule throughout the year except for one period when water issues from it, irrigating the cultivated fields and turning the millwheels.
p. 445
In Sabiir is a mountain on which is sculpted every king and satrap known to the Persians. In MOrjan is a cave, water dripping from its roof. If one man enters,
361
THE REGION OF FARS
only enough trickles out to satisfy a man; should a thousand men go in, enough comes out to satisfy them.
In Jūr is a pool at the gate of the town; here are huge copper pots, and from the uppermost one of those pots flows a considerable amount of water. In Sahik (al-Gharb) is a well which is bottomless; enough water bubbles out of it to turn a mill wheel, and irrigate that village. In al-Ghundijan is a stream between two mountains, and vapour comes out of it. No one can approach it, and if a bird passes over it it falls in and is consumed by fire. In the sea at Siraf is a place we passed by; some water dogs came down and jumped into the sea, holding waterskins. They then emerged, having filled them with sweet water. I questioned them on it and they said that a spring comes out at the bottom of the sea. Half a farsakh from KazarOn is a dome people said is the middle of the world. In the districts around Istakhr are hills asserted to be the ashes of the fire of Abrahamson whom be peace. Here also are remarkable bridges, some new, some pre-Islamic.
The waters ofthe area are copious, for here are numerous rivers. The River Tab p. 446 emerges from the mountains of Isfahan, flows beside the boundary of the region to Arrajan. The main road is beside it, crossing it over arches many times. Addition/version MS. c
... [It flows] as far as Slnlz, then turned at the boundary; over it is a number of stone bridges. This region has an abundance of stone bridges, among them Qantara (stone bridge) of Abo Talib, stretching from one mountain to another, and Qantara ʾAdhud al-Dawla, and this is a wonder!
The River Shlrln, the River al-Shadhkan; the River Darkhid; the River KhObdhan; the River Ratln; the River Ikhshln; the River Sakkan; the River Jarslk; the River al-Kurr; the River Farawab; and the River Tirza-these are the largest of the rivers.
There are five lakes-Laka al-Bakhtikan [Nlrlz] is about twenty farsakhs in length; it is salty, situated in the district of Istakhr. Lake Dasht Arzin in the district of Sabūr is tenfarsakhs long; it is sweet water, dries up sometimes. Most of the fish for Shiraz are from here. Lake KazarOn, ten farsakhs long, is salty. It has arms, and many fish are taken from it. Lake al-Jankan is about twelve farsakhs long; salt is derived from the edges of it, in the district of Ardashlr Khurra. Lake al-Bafahllya, eight farsakhs long, is salty; papyrus and thickets grow in it. The Sea of China flows along the entire southern coast of the region. Tribes of the Kurds here are thirty-three in number: al-Kirmaniyya; al-Ramaniyya; Mudaththir; Hayy Muhammad Ibn Bashar; al-Thaʿlabiyya (Baqlll); al-Bundamahriyya; Hayy Muhammad bin Ishaq; al-Sabahiyya; al-Ishaqiyya; al-Adarkaniyya; al-Sahrakiyya; al-Tahmadahniyya; al-Zabadiyya; al-Shahrawiyya; al-Mahrakiyya; al-Bundaqiyya; al-Khusrawiyya; al-Zanjiyya;
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
362
al-Safariyya; al-Mubarakiyya; Istamahriyya; al-ShahOniyya; al-Furatiyya; al-SalmOniyya; al-Slriyya; al-Azaddakhitiyya; al-Mutallabiyya; al-Mamaliyya; al-Shakaniyya; al-Jallliyya [three names not included in al-Muqaddasl's list: Shahyarl; Barazdakhtl; Kajtl]. They have five hundred tents.
The citadels. In Istakhr is a great citadel, the width of the main part of it p. 447 a farsakh. In it are water tanks. A commander is permanently there, as are merchants. A number of the kings' storehouses are there, and some pre-Islamic chattels. In Shlraz is a citadel built by ʿAdhud al-Dawla. He spent a considerable amount of money on it, and in it dug a well at the base of the mountain. In Nasa, Kathah, Fasa, Qaryat al-Ās, Darabjird,Junbad, Arrajan, Zlrabadh stand citadels, and some are by the sea. Ibrahim bin Muhammad al-Farisl [al-Istakhrl] said that they would amount to five thousand citadels.
Addition/version MS. c
In it are the treasures of the kings of Filrs from the pre-Islamic period. It is a difficult place to approach, well fortified, and with some ponds of water, and with the entrenched ruler who will.not leave it. ʿAdhud al-Dawla built a fortress in Shlraz on the top of a mountain, and dug therein a well, splitting the mountain until he reached water, spending a considerable amount of money on it. A fortress pertains to each one of the following: Kathah, al-Baydhilʾ, Fasil, Dilrilbjird, Junbad, Arrajiln. Ibrahlm al-Farisl mentions five hundred fortresses, and three and thirty tribes of the Kurds.
The encampments here are five in number: the largest of them is zumm (the encampment of) Ahmad bin Salih, known as al-Daywan; then that of Shahriyar, known as the encampment of al-Bazinjan—these are they who are in the area of Isfahan, and some of the people of this encampment are nomads. Then there is that of Ahmad bin al-Hasan, known as the encampment of al-Kariyan; it is the encampment of Ardashlrkhurrah.
The situation ofFars: it is divided by a line from Arrajan to al-Nawbandijan to Kazarūn to Khurrah, then along the borders of the coast to Karazln until it reaches al-Zamm; what lies to the south is hot, what lies toward the north is cold. In the hot areas lie: Arrajan, Nawbandijan, Slnlz, Tawwaz, Khurrah, Dadhln, Mūz, Karzln, Dasht al-Būsqān, Klr, Klzrln, Abzar, Samlran, Khumayijan, p. 448 Khurmuq, Kuran, Slraf, Najlram, Hisn Ibn ʿUmara, and areas in subjunction to these places. In the cold areas are situated: Istakhr, al-Baydhaʾ, Ma'ln, Iraj, Kam Flrūz, Kūrd, Kallar, Sarwaslr (Sarwistan), al-Awsbanjan (Usbanjan), Ord, al-Rūn, Siram, Bazranj, Sardan, al-Khurrama, al-Hlra, al-Nlrlz, al-Maskanat, al-īj (Ik), al-Isbahanat, Būrm (Barm), Ruhnan, Bawwan, Tarkhanlshan, al-jObarqan, Iqlld, al-Jarmaq, Abarqūh, and there are other places similarly situated. The area of equable climate lies between those, being the district ofDarabjird, and Shlraz, and Fasa, and what is included in this area, as far as Jūr and its territory.
363
THE REGION OF FARS
The imperfections: the water of Arrajiln is bad, as is the water of Diiriibjird. The water of the wells of Shlrilz is afflictive. Most of the hot areas have a bad climate, and a changing of colours; there the healthiest places are Slrilf, Arrajan, Jannaba, Slnlz. The most moderate climate is that in the areas between the two extremes.
In Dasht Barln is a spring at which people seek cure from diseases; the water of the capital of Siibūr is afflictive.
This is a country of tyranny. I read in a book in the library of ʿAdhud al-Dawla that the people of Fiirs are the most obedient of all people to the ruler; they are the most patient of tyranny; have the heaviest taxes; are the most obsequious in spirit. The people of Fars have never known justice! But suppose one were to say, “Did not the Prophet—God's peace and blessings be upon him-praise them in saying that even if the faith were in the Pleiades, men from among the people of Fars would attach themselves to it?" In reply it would be said that Khurasan and Filrs were the same place as far as the Arabs were concerned, and when they produced any scholar at all the matter was mentioned far and wide. And see how many [scholars] Khurilsan has produced, such as Ibn al-Mubiirak and Ibn Rahwayh, and others like them in jurisprudence and the Traditions: and indeed to this day they do not lack eminent Imilms. On the other p. 449 hand, Fars is entirely lacking in people of that stamp, they have written nothing dependable, no record in science that one can refer to. Do you not notice that AbO Khalid said, “Fars is three thousand farsakhs," whereas this region is but one hundred twenty in each dimension? So you realize that he had Khurilsan and the places around it in mind.
Sovereignty there is in the hands of the Būyids. The first to dominate this area was ʿAll bin Buwayh; but he had no children, so he adopted ʿAdhud al-Dawla, and he reigned after him. He was the son of his brother, and he built in Shlraz an edifice the like of which I have not seen in the East or in the West. No ordinary person has entered it without being charmed by it, and no expert without coming to the conclusion that in it is the delight and excellence of Paradise. He had streams run through it, built domes over it; he surrounded it with gardens and trees, and excavated cisterns there. He assembled every convenience and contrivance there. I have heard the head of the custodians say that there are three hundred sixty compartments; and one hall in which was his place of assembly every day of the year, this hall being the lower portion of the building. In the upper part is the library, a compartment by itself. There is a manager, a librarian, and a supervisor from among the people of good repute in the town; and there was not a book written up to that time, of all the various sciences, but happened to be there. It consists of a long oblong gallery in a large hall, with rooms on every side. He attached to all the walls of the gallery and of the rooms bookcases six feet in height and three cubits long, made of wood, and decorated. On the bookcases are doors that open from above, and the books are arranged on shelves. For every subject there are bookcases, and catalogues in
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
364
which are the names of the books; and no one has access to them except he be a person of distinction. I walked about in this building, all of it, below and above, and it had been completely equipped. And I saw at every seat what was needed there, both furniture and curtains. I noticed also the canvas awnings over which the water glides through tubes continuously from above, from conduits around it. I also observed the streamlets flowing uninterruptedly among the rooms and the living quarters. I really think he built it according to the accounts he heard of Paradise! However, he was so far from that realization that he undoubtedly went astray, and was burdened with his sins: even his house did not remain. He dwells in the grave, after having all the kingship and the trappings. He died [372/983] the worst manner of death, and God showed him misery. He became a stern lecture and a warning to us. One of the eunuchs recited some verses he said he heard from him near the time of his death. Now he had ruled the eight [non-Arab] regions and his name had been mentioned in the Friday sermon in al-Sind and al-Yaman. And he coveted the Orient, and opposed the ruler of the Maghrib.
Monarchs feared him, and he made prisoner the emperor of the Romaeans. He knew a variety of sciences, and was experienced in astronomy. Said the poet: Enjoy the things of the world, for you will not remain forever; take from it what is pure in it, refrain from what is turbid.
Do not put your hopes in destiny— put my hopes in it!—
and nothing was spared for me of my status; nor did it reserve any right
for me.
I voided the royal residence of every distinction:
I dispersed them to the West, routed them to the East.
And when I touched the star in my might and glory the necks of all mankind became enslaved to me.
But death shot an arrow at me, and extinguished my firebrand; and here I am speedily cast into a grave.
All my wealth availed me nought, nor did I find
with the Hunter of Souls, in my perdition, aught of mercy;
for I perverted my world and my religion insolently,
and who is there, more than I, in his misery more damned.
Addition/version MS. c
He gave himself the agnomen ʿAmld al-Dawla; he did not have a son, and so adopted ʿAdhud al-Dawla, who ruled the region in succession; then his son,
Abu al-Fawaris. ʿAdhud al-Dawla was one of the tyrants and one of those with ambition. He built a palace in Shiraz the like of which I have not seen in the East or the West; and when Zarif, the eunuch, entered Shiraz an invitation was extended to him when he was in the garden. The palace was decorated and carpeted; he was brought in to make the rounds of it, and I was with him. No ordinary person has entered it without being charmed by it, and no intelligent
p. 450
365
THE REGION OF FARS
person whose soul did not yearn for the castles of Paradise; I am ofthe opinion, indeed, that he built it after the pattern of what he heard of the abodes of Paradise. There is a lower part, and an upper part. A stream used to cut through to the lower part, turning a millstone, coming there from a post stage away: it enters the city he built, and passes among some of the compartments and galleries, flowing and turning. He had another channel brought to the upper level from a distance of two farsakhs away, and made the water to flow over the canvas roof terraces of the compartments so that it would continuously overspread them, and thus they would be always moist. Moreover, those compartments he coloured he did so in Chinese terra-cotta; of those he did not colour, some were of stone, some that were not carpeted were done in marble, some were gilded, some illustrated with drawings. He made of it three hundred sixty compartments, one for every day of the year, and no compartment resembled any other one in its construction, furnishings, draperies, or seating. He encompassed it round about with wondrous gardens in which were gathered together exotic fruits. The repository of the books was separate, and in charge of it a librarian, a supervisor, a keeper of the keys, and an overseer from among the people of good repute in the town; and there was not a single book published in a branch of the sciences that he did not gather together there. It consists of a long oblong gallery with rooms on every side. He had attached to the walls of the rooms bookcases six feet in height, three cubits long, and with shelves. On the bookcases are doors that come down from above, and the books are arranged on shelves. For every subject there is a bookcase, or bookcases, and catalogues in which are the names of the books. That gallery was carpeted with rugs of the most surpassing excellence from ʿAbbadan, and a screen fastened to the door. Doorkeepers were appointed over the entrance, and no one may enter unless he be distinguished.
Tyranny prevails in the region, and I read in a book in this library that the people of Fars are the most abjectly servile in submissiveness to the ruler, and the most persevering under oppression, pay the heaviest land taxes, and are the most humble in spirit. In the book it said that the people of Fars do not know any justice whatsoever. But suppose some one were to say: “Did not the Prophet-God’s peace and blessings be upon him-praise them when he said: ‘Even if the Faith were in the Pleiades, the men of the people of Fars would attain to it.’”? It would be said in reply: “Khurasan and Fars were, in the notion of the Arabs, one and the same: do you not see that Abu Khalid said—‘Fars is three thousand farsakhs’, whereas, in fact, this region is one hundred twenty in each dimension; so you realize that he meant to say Khurasan. And upon my life, if both knowledge and the faith were in the Pleiades, the people of Khurasan would cleave to it. And when did Fars produce a learned man, or an ascetic, or a noble? May God preserve us from the levies of this region! The amir Abu al-Fawaris used to assign to me every year three hundred dirhams. So I said to Abu al-Fadhl bin Nahama: ‘Will you find for me a rationale that would make this gift acceptable to me?’ Said he: ‘This is money that is the aggregate of imposts and revenue of villages over which he had gained the mastery.’ Said 1: ‘Then I will certainly never accept it.’ ”
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
366
p. 451 The land taxes of this region vary. In Shlraz on ajarib [a measure of arable land] of wheat and of barley is an assessment of one hundred ninety dirhams; and of dates and of melon fields two hundred thirty-seven dirhams; on cotton, two hundred fifty-six dirhams and four danaqs [one-sixth dirham]; on vineyards one thousand four hundred twenty-five dirhams. The large jarib is seventy cubits, the “royal" cubit, that is, which equals nine qabadhat [one qabadha, or fist = 12.5 cm]. The land tax in Kuwar is two-thirds of what we have mentioned; it was lowered by al-Rashld. The land tax of Istakhr is less than the land tax of Shlraz, on agriculture, by a little.
Rain irrigates only one-third of the region. And do not ask about the burden and the number of the imposts!
p■ 452 A number of ratls are in use here. The rati of Shlraz is the big one equivalent to eight ratls of Baghdad; vinegar, milk, and such commodities are measured with it. Here also is used the Makkan mann. With the ratiofBaghdad is weighed meat and bread and the like. The mann of bread in Fasa is three hundred [dirhams], also of cotton, and of grain. Sugar; saffron, honey, henna, dye, pharmaceuticals are weighed by the mann of three hundred dirhams. Heavier than it is the mann used for dried meat, meat, iron and such, by five and twenty [dirhams]. The mann of Darabjird, which is known by that name, used for everything except . for pharmaceuticals; it is four hundred forty dirhams. Thread, bread, safflower, angora wool, and wool are four hundred eighty dirhams. The mann of Nlrlz in weighing everything except pharmaceuticals is three hundred twenty [dirhams], while the mann for thread is three hundred forty.
The measures: the qafiz of Fasa is six manns, a mann being three hundred dirhams, and is used with grain, and what almonds there are. For barley the qafiz is six manns; the qafiz for rice, chickpeas, lentils, eight manns. The qafiz of Nlrlz is three ratls of Baghdad, used with barley, raisins, seedless raisins, and durra; the qafiz of wheat is more than that. The mann of Arrajan is three rath) except for sugar, and the big qafiz is ten manns. The makkuk is half the qafiz, and the p. 453 jarib is ten qafiz. On the assessed land is exacted for every palm tree one fourth of a dirham. The villages vary: in Sanbll the tax is from three dirhams to half a dirham, in Arrajan from three dirhams to a dirham. For untilled assessed land the tax is twenty dirhams.
The distances in this region:
From Arrajan to Rlshahr, one stage;
thence to Mahruban, one stage.
From Arrajan to Bisabik(?), one stage; thence to Dihllzan, one stage; thence to Khabaran, two post stages;
367
THE REGION OF FARS
thence to Wadi '1-Milh, one stage; thence to Ramhurmuz, two post stages.
From Arrajan to al-Zaytūn, two post stages; thence to Habs, one stage; thence to Bandaq, one stage;
thence to Junbad, two post stages, or one post stage by way of al-ʿAqaba
(ʿAqabat al-Fil = the pass of the elephant);
thence to Zanak, two post stages;
thence to Dakhwldh, one stage;
thence to Khwadhan (Khawrawadhan), two post stages;
thence to al-Nawbandijan, the same.
From Arrajan to Kanisat al-MajOs, one stage; thence to Qarya (?), one stage; thence to al-Ziz, one stage; thence to al-ʿAyniyya, one stage; thence to the river, one stage; thence to Kharanda, one stage; thence to Sumayram, one stage.
From Mahrūban to Sinlz, or to the river, one stage; from the river to Arrajan, one stage; from Slnlz to Sanjahan, one stage; thence to Jannaba, one stage; thence to Dasht DawOdl, one stage; thence to Tawwaz, one stage; thence to Khasht, one stage; thence to Nlmarah, one stage, half of it difficult; thence to Sabūr, a like distance.
From Slraf to Jamm, one stage; thence to Barzara, one stage; thence to Klrand, one stage; thence to Mah, one stage; thence to Raykan, one stage; thence to Biyabshūrab, one stage; thence to JOr, one stage.
From Slraf to ʿUman, by sea, or to al-Basra, is a sailing distance of from five to
ten farsakhs■,
thence to al-Bahrayn, seventyfarsakhs, the width of the sea.
p. 454
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
368
From Darabjird to Khasū, one stage; thence to Karab, one stage; thence to Juwaym Abi Ahmad, one stage; thence to Kariyan, one stage; thence to Barab, one stage; thence to Kuran, one stage; thence to Siraf, one stage.
From Darabjird to Jarmuwa, one stage; thence to Rustaq al-Rustaq, one stage; thence to Burk, one stage; thence to Tarum, one stage. p. 455 From Darabjird to Jah Zandaya, one stage; thence to Taymaristan, one stage; thence to Fasa, one half stage.
From Shlraz to Kafrah, one stage; thence to KOl, one stage; thence to Būmhan, one stage; thence to JOr, one stage.
From Shiraz to Qaryat Juwaym, one stage; thence to Khullar, two post stages; thence to al-Kharrāra, a like distance; thence to Jarkan, one stage; thence to al-Nawbandijan, one stage;
and here is Sha<b Bawwan, which is one of the recreation grounds ofthe world.
From Shiraz to Qaryat al-Rumman, one stage; thence to Sarwistan, one stage; thence to Kurram, one stage; thence to Fasa, one stage.
From Shiraz to Daryan, one stage; thence to Khurrama, one stage; thence to Kath, one stage; thence to Khayar, one stage; thence to Nirlz, one stage; thence to Kadrū, one stage; thence to Ribat Zariidwa, one stage; thence to Nahr Man, one stage; thence to Hantah, one stage;
369
THE REGION OF FARS
thence to Bimand, one stage; thence to al-Sirjan, two post stages.
From Shiraz to Rakan, one stage; thence to Raʾs al-Sikr, one stage; thence to Ziyadabadh, one stage; thence to Jubb Amlr al-Muʾminln, one stage; thence to Raʾs al-Dunya, one stage.
From Shlraz to Sahah, one stage;
thence to Dasht Arzan, one stage-difficult, and here is ʿAqabat Balan. From Fasa to Karazln, one stage; thence to Hurmuz, one stage; and from Karazln to Kharzln, one stage.
I do not know a metropolis that occupies the middle of its region except this one, and Hamadhan. Do you not see that from it [Shlraz] to Kathah or to Tarum, or to Najlram or to the River Tab is in every case sixtyfarsakhs; while from it to the four corners [of this region], to Sinlz or to al-Rūdhan or to SOrO, or to the frontier with Isfahan, is in every case eighty farsakhs. And around it are cities from which the distances to it are about equal. A man in Kazarūn told me that someone fled the ruler and sped to Sabūr. Then he asked how far it is to Shlraz, and they told him, eighteenfarsakhs. Then he hurried to KazarOn and asked how far it is to Shlraz, and they told him, eighteenfarsakhs. He sped to Khurrah and asked how far it is to Shlraz and they said, sixteenfarsakhs. Then he sped to JOr and enquired, and they said twentyfarsakhs. From it to al-Baydhaʾ is one stage. From SabOr to KazarOn, one stage;
thence to Khurrah, one stage.
From Sabūr to al-Nawbandijan, one stage; and from SabOr to Karak, one stage; thence to Dasht Arzan, one stage.
From KazarOn to Qaryat al-Hatab, two post stages, thence to Dasht Arzan, a like distance.
From Kazarūn to Darlz, two post stages; thence to Raʾs al-ʿAqaba, a like distance; thence to Tawwaz, a like distance; thence to Qaryat(?), a like distance; thence to Jannaba, a like distance;
P. 456
p. 457
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
370
From Istakhr to Raʾs al-Sakr, two post stages; and from Istakhr to al-Baydhāʾʾ or to Qaryat al-Hammam (Kalūdhar), one stage;
and from Qaryat al-Hamm:lm to Ziyadawadh (Ziyadabadh), one post stage;
thence to Jubb Amlr al-Muʾminln,
thence to Raʾs al-Dunyā,
thence to Khawaristān, one stage;
thence to Har:lt, one stage;
thence to Rādhān, one stage;
thence to Shabāwak (Shababak), one stage;
thence to Riw:lr, one stage;
thence to Qaryat al-Jammāl, one stage;
thence to al-Rodhan, one stage.
From Istakhr to Blr, two post stages; thence to Kahmanda, one stage; thence to Qaryat Bidh, a like distance; thence to Abarqoh, one stage; thence to Qaryat al-Asad, a like distance; thence to al-٧rd, one stage; thence to Qalaʿt al-Majfls, one stage; thence to Kathah, one stage; thence to Anjlrah, a like distance.
From al-Yahodiyya to Khiln Rash, one stage; thence to Qumisa, one stage; thence to Karo, one stage; thence to Sumayram, one stage.
From al-Yahodiyya to the caravanserai of Khan Linj:ln, one stage; thence to Karo, one stage; thence to M:ls, one stage; thence to Khan Rnshan, two post stages; thence to Istakhran, one stage; thence to Qasr ACJn, one stage; thence to Khuwiskan, one stage; thence to Maʾln, one stage; thence to Az:lr (Haz:lr) Sabor, one stage; thence to Shim, one stage.
Should you so wish, you may take the route through the desert, from Qumisa to Ruzk:ln, one stage; thence to Azk:ls, one stage; thence to Sarwistān, one stage;
p. 458
371
THE REGION OF FARS
thence to Saramsah, one stage; thence to Lah Wikrah, one stage; thence to Qaryat al-Khallaf, one stage; thence to Kamahank, one stage; thence to Qaryat Ibn Bandar, one stage; thence to Istakhr, one stage.
From Sumayram to Jaʿfarabadh, one stage; thence to al-Zab, one stage; thence to Kord and Kallar, one stage; thence to Mihrajanawadh, one stage; thence to Ash Wabiird, one stage; thence to Nasa, two post stages; thence to Shiraz, one stage.
From al-Yahodiyya to Khalanjan, one stage; thence to Barkan, one stage; thence to Isbidh Dasht, a like distance; thence to Jaʿad Wajord, a like distance; thence to the guardhouse, a like distance; thence to Koristan, one stage; thence to Jisr Jahannam, one stage.
p. 459
The Regii of Kirman (Sonth Central Iran)
This region resembles Fars in pecularities, is like al-Basra in its customs, and approaches Khurasan in its characteristics; this is because it borders the sea, and combines within it cold areas and hot, nuts and date palms; it has an abundance of dates and syrups, and fruits, and ripe dates. Here is Jlruft, about which sayings have been coined; and ManOqan to which there is so much traffic. And for the dates ofKhabis, people come to a halt. Here are level ground, mountains, sandstone, sands; flocks of grazing livestock, and camels. Here are remarkable special things, and workshops. Here is zinc that flows in pipes like cold water, and we have described this clearly in the account ofNarmaslr. The cloth ofBamm is famed in the East and in the West for beauty. Even so the people are humble, and not at all disagreeable. Kirman is the storehouse ofprosperity and luxury; its water is good, its climate moderate. Here is perfection of religion and decency; their speech is correct, in their intelligence is no lapse. Kirman is distinguished; however, it is in an unbalanced condition. It is hot on the littoral, and the snakes there are long. They have no jurists, nor preachers, to expound the law publicly. Their bodies are skinny, resembling toothpicks! There is much wasteland here, and no river in which a vessel sails. Two states claim it, consider it domain for p. 460 themselves. Hence, disorder is rife, and what fighting there is here!
Here is a representation of its form and features; and in God is success, He has no partner. [Map XVIII]
This region consists of five provinces and districts, the first across from Fars being Bardaslr, then Narmasir, then al-Sirjan, then Bamm, then Jlruft.
Bardaslr is a district that lies close to the desert, and has both cold areas and hot. In their own language the people call it Kuwashlr. Its capital has the same name, and among its towns are: Mahan, KOghiin, Zarand, Janzariidh, Kūh Binan, Qawaf, Unas, Zawar, KhOnawab, Ghubayra, Karishtan. Of the district of Khabis the towns are: Nashk, Kashid, KOk, Kathrawa.
Narmasir also lies close to the desert in the direction of Sijistan; its capital has the same name, similarly al-Khams. Among its cities are Bahar, Karak, Rikan, Nasa.
Al-Sirjan is in a central position among the provinces, though more towards Fars. Its capital is the metropolis and among its cities are: Bimand, al-Shamat, Wajib, Baziirak, Khūr, Dasht Barin.
p. 461 Bamm is also on the border of Fars, and among its cities are: Darzhin, TOshtan, Awarak, Mihrikird, Rayin.
Jiruft is the most delightful district in the region, bordering on the Sea of China, and adjoining Makran. All kinds of different things are here-the rivers flow abundantly, the fruit is excellent. It has many cities, among them: Bas, Jakin, Maniiqan, Darahqan, Juy Sulayman, Kūh Barjan, Quhistan, MughOn, Jawawan, Walashjird, Rūdhkan, DarfanL
ssn3j٥؟S3qjni١n^ j3qos؟!z‘ لأوواولآ JO؟iu3؟3iq؟٠5un١ لىل0لالآ 5 .SPYىلولاةول 09 ipjBAViqv—sعؤ Xq ٩؟tuj3d pu؟ss؟is 3qij0 U0؟؟qsi؟٩3qioqq ٠d 33S) uBixurM :iiiax dm ZZf)
NYWra AO NOI033 لاHL
iLi
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
374
Bardaslr is the capital. It is not large, but it is fortified, and the government offices of the region are there at present, as is the army. Beside it is a large fort. Here are gardens; and a great and remarkable well was dug by AbO ʿAli bin Ilyas, and it was he who selected this capital and lived here twenty years. There is a stronghold at the gate, and around the town is a moat with bridges over it. It has four gates: Bab Mahan, Bab Zarand, Bab Khabls, Bab Mubarak. Most of the p. 462 drinking water is from wells, and there is also a canal. In the middle of the town is another fort, and the mosque, a handsome one, is close to it. Gardens surround the town. The fortress is on high ground, and Ibn Ilyas used to go up there on mountainy horses accustomed to the climb, and he would sleep there every night. Canals surrounding the town irrigate the gardens here.
Mahan is a city of the Arabs. The mosque is in the middle of the town; the drinking water here is derived from a stream. In the middle of the town is a quhandiz with a single door, and a moat surrounds it You travel a distance of one stage from the town to the citadel, situated among trees closely intertwined, and flowing waters.
The mosque of Kūghūn is in the centre of the town. The drinking water here is derived from a stream and canals.
Beside Zarand Ibn Ilyas built a fortress; it is a large town. The drinking water is from canals. The mosque is in the public square near the market.
Janzarūdh produces much fruit; the mosque is in the markets. There is a stream.
Unas is bigger than al-Rūdhan. It is situated right at the boundary, and is in ruin; some good copyists here. The mosque is in the middle of the market. The drinking water here is from canals. A fort stands in the middle of the town; and there are suburbs.
Kūh Binan: small, with two gates. Here are suburbs, with baths and hostels. The mosque is at the gate. Gardens surround it, and the mountains are close by. Its market is small. Knowledge there is slender, and the preacher is grievous to the spirit!
Zawar is bigger than Koh Bayan; there is a fortress. The town is at the boundary.
Khūnawab is central to the region. The mosque stands amidst the markets. There are many farms, villages and sorb trees. Some of the irrigation here is by water wheels, and the mills here are turned by camels.
Qawaf and Bahawadh have a distance of three farsakhs between them: they are in the cold region. Gardens are all over here; and both towns are populous and pleasant.
Thubayra is a small town, with villages, in the cold area. The drinking water p. 463 here is from a stream. In the middle of the town is a quhandiz; Ibn Ilyals had built a market outside the town. The mosque is in midtown.
Karistan is cold; walnuts and farms abound. The drinking water is from a stream, from which five and twenty villages there drink.
375
THE REGION OF KIRMAN
Khabls has a fortress, with four gates. The dates are excellent. The mosque is in midtown. The drinking water is derived from canals and a stream. Its towns are on the edge of the desert, and are quite populous. It is a source of dates, and silk; and the mulberry tree abounds.
Narmilslr is a capital, important, large, and populous; it is an entrepot and a source of supplies; hence it is much spoken of in this region. It is a source of supplies to which people travel, a precious place; a populous and remarkable town. Its palaces are handsome, elegant. Here are substantial merchants, an abundance of goods and camels: from here originate the caravans of KhurilSiln, and thither are brought the goods of CUmiln. Here are brought together the dates of Kirmiln, and through it goes the Pilgrimage route from Sijistiln. From it is exported valued Indian merchandise. Here are fine people, wealth and ease. However, the women are wanton, and the town is far removed from others. The ruler is not safe there, scoundrels are not punished. People there do not live long; there is no jurist to consider decisions, and no reader who is an Imilm.
It is smaller than al-Sīrjān, has a fortress. The town has four gates: Bilb Bamm; Bilb Sorkon; Bilb al-Musallil; Bilb Koshk. The mosque is in the middle of the markets, and is well attended; one ascends to it by ten steps. Built ofburnt brick, it is a handsome mosque, with a minaret without compare in the region. Here stands a fort called Kosh Wariln; and at the Bamm gate are three forts named al-Akhawilt (the Sisters). Gardens and palm trees surround the town, and all kinds of fruits are assembled there. The drinking water is derived from canals; the baths here are not bad.
Rlkiln has a fortress; the mosque is at the town gate. Palm trees and gardens abound.
Bilhar and Kark are two populous towns on the border of Sijistiln; they both p. 464 have gardens and palm trees, a stream and canals. Both are attractive.
Nasi has gardens; is on a plain. The mosque is in the markets. The drinking water is from a stream. It is like Nilbulus.
Al-Sirjiln is the metropolis of the region, the largest of the capitals, the foremost in knowledge and understanding, the best in its layout, splendour, and population. The people are prosperous, the markets extensive, the streets wide; the houses are beautiful. Here are gardens, flowing waters; the walls are lofty. It is a flourishing town, equable in climate. Plenty of money is here, abundance, special things, and manufacturing. Here stands a beautiful mosque, with a minaret. The town is large, fortified, more magnificent, more extensive than ShlrilZ. The climate is moderate, the water pure, the food clean. All kinds of things are gathered there, with an abundance of agricultural products, low prices, knowledge, experience. However, most of the populace here are Muʿtazilites; and the city has few inhabitants: its towns are few. There are eight gates: Darb Hakim; Darb Khilrinjiln (?)؛ Darb Bamm; Darb Musalla; Darb al-Maydiln; Darb Fudhayl; Darb Rodhiln; Darb Shayban. The town has two markets, an old and a new, with the mosque between them, standing by itself. ʿAdhud al-Dawla
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
376
built a remarkable minaret there, on top of it some very delicate contrivances, made of wood, some of which revolve. He built, too, over Bab (Darb) Hakim a fine house. The waters of the town are from two canals which ʿAmr and Tahir, the two sons of Layth, constructed; they flow through the town, entering the houses of the people, spreading over their gardens. The buildings here are of clay. Most of their gardens are in the direction of Bamm.
Blmand has a strong fortress, and iron gates. The mosque stands in the market. The drinking water is from canals.
Al-Shll.mat has many gardens and vineyards. Its fruits are carried throughout the districts. The mosque is in the middle of the town.
Wajib is populous, has many gardens. The mosque is in the markets. The drinking water here is from canals; it has a very fine park.
BazOrak has a large population, is at the foot of a mountain. It is surrounded by gardens, produces excellent fruit. The drinking water here is from canals.
KhOr is important, abounds in fruits. A stream flows through it, on its bank the mosque.
Dasht Barln is an extensive rural district. Here is an abundance of dates, indigo, grains. I do not know if it has any towns.
Bahar is similar to Bamm, with buildings and date palms just as we have described.
Khannab, from this side: some there are, however, who do not attach it to this district.
Bamm is a capital, important; fine, large. The inhabitants are a people of craftsmanship and skill. Its goods are sought after, its cloth renowned afar. In Islam it is renowned, and is the glory of the region. However, most of them are weavers, their waters are not sweet, nor is their climate good. It has a fortress. The city has four gates: Bab Narmasir; Bab KOskan; Bab Isbikan; Bab Kojin. In its midst is a citadel. The mosque and some of the markets are in the city, the remaining markets outside the walls. In the middle of the town is a stream that flows to the edge of the town, then cuts through the clothiers' market, enters the citadel, then goes out to the gardens. The buildings here are of very fine cohesive clay. Among their markets is the market of the Jurjan Bridge. Most of the drinking water here is from canals. Among the famous baths here is the bath of Zuqaq al-Bldh (the Alley of the Willow). Jabal Kūd is afarsakh away. The mills here are on the water. Nearby is a large village in which most of the cloth is made.
Toshtan has many gardens, produces excellent wheat. The drinking water here is from a stream and canals. It is a prosperous place, suited to agriculture.
Darzhln has a splendid mosque. The drinking water here is from a stream.
Here are gardens, farms, and agricultural products; also a park.
Awarak and Mihrikird adjoin, between them a citadel which Ibn Ilyas built. The drinking water here is from a stream; the buildings are of clay.
Rayin is small; the mosque is amidst the markets: many gardens. Much cloth is made there of the Bamm variety; it goes to the same market as the Bamm cloth.
p. 465
p. 46
377
THE REGION OF KIRMAN
Jlruft is the finest of the capitals, a source of fruits and produce. In it are assembled all varieties of things, here are parks and gardens. The markets, the baths are splendid, bread and meats are clean; the water melon is sweet. However, the heat is intense, and there are injurious things here. Along with that there are bedbugs and snakes; and but little knowledge or instruction. Over the town is a fortress. The town has four gates-—ab SabOr, Bab Bamm, Bab al-Slrajan, Bab al-Musalla (the gate of the oratory). The mosque stands at the edge of the town close to the Bamm gate, built of burnt brick and mortar, far removed from the markets. The inhabitants derive their drinking water from a stream that flows through the streets and the markets; it has a strong flc;>w, turning twenty mill wheels. The town is bigger than Istakhr. The building is of clay on stone foundations. Snow is brought hither, and a stream flows in the mosque. The rural district is very fine indeed, assembling in its gardens date palms, walnuts; here are finest narcissus and bitter orange, and the breezes are filled with aroma from them both. This is a fine respectable city.
HurmOz is a farsakh from the sea; the heat is intense. The mosque is in the markets. The drinking water is from canals of sweet water. The markets are on the main streets; the buildings here are of clay.
Bas and Jakln are two towns a stage from the sea; smaller than HurmOz. The mosque of each town is in the markets.
ManOqan is the Basra of Kirman; from here come the provisions of Khurasan of very fine cheap dates. Moreover it consists of two sections, between p. 467 them an extensive dry wadi; one side is Konln, the other Zaman. Midway between the two is a citadel and a mosque. From the two parts to the sea is a journey of two days, several days to Darahqan. It is glorious, and is like MOqan in al-Rihab. Now, suppose someone were to say, “Whence did you learn that every city with name ending in ‘-an’ has some especial distinction?"; we should reply to him that it is known from the multiplicity of instances. There is proof for it also in the book of God-may He be exalted. Do you not see that a person may be named “Rahim"; so if you add the “alif' [“a"] and the “nOn" [“n"], the name becomes “Rahman," becoming a designation of God-may He be glorified and exalted! Do you not know also all running water is called “hamlm"? Then, when the “alif' [“a"] and the “nOn" [“n"] are attached to it the word becomes an attribute ofJahannam [hell]. Moreover “qitr" means “copper;" but when God-may He be exalted-wished to tell us that it is a punishment on the people of Jahannam, He attached the “alif' and the “nUn". [“qitran," i.e., “pitch, tar."]
Darahqan is surrounded by sand, and steppe, though in the vicinity of the sea. The drinking water here is from canals. Here are gardens, with palm trees. The mosque is in midtown.
Joy Sulayman is a medium sized town; the population is large, the rural district extensive. The drinking water is from a stream that cuts through the town. The mosque and quhandiz are in midtown.
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
378
KOh Bllrjlln has many gardens, equable climate, many different kinds of things here. It has a quhandiz, and the mosque is in the town. The drinking water is derived from a stream and wells.
Quhistlln Abl Ghllnim: the centre of town is hot; many date palms; the drinking water is from a stream that penetrates the town. The mosque is in midtown, and there is a quhandiz.
Mughūn has many gardens, and much bitter orange. The drinking water here is from canals. Here is one of the sources of indigo.
Jawllwan: small; the drinking water is from canals.
Walllshjird: over it a fortress, also a quhandiz called KOsha. The drinking water here is from canals; it has gardens.
Rūdhklln: a populous town, with palm trees, gardens, and much bitter orange. The drinking water is from a stream and canals.
Of Darfllni, half pertains to the hot areas, half to the cold. It is on the main road. Here are different kinds of fruit; a fine attractive town.
Between al-Sirjlln and Bamm are: Rllʾin, Dllrzhin, Mllʾin. Between Jlruft p. 468 and the desert are: JanzarOdh, Firzln; and between Jlruft and al-Sirjlln are: Nlljat, Khlr. Between al-Sirjlln and Fllrs are: Kashlstlln, Jayrūqlln, Marzuqlln, al-SOraqlln, MughOn. I did not enter these places, nor did I meet any judicious person with whom I might consider their circumstances, and say to what [districts] they should be attributed.
Isbidh, however, we consider to be like Taymllʾ.
A Summary Account of Conditions in this Region The hot areas in this region exceed the cold areas, the middle being equable, like Fllrs. Fllrs is more extensive, more important, more populous; while this region has much wilderness, and inaccessible mountains. The area has a curved gulf at the sea coast, although al-Fllrisi [Abo Ishllq Ibrllhlm bin Muhammad al-Fllrisi al-Istakhri] attributes the promontory here to Fllrs, just like the sleeve of land near al-Rūdhlln. The hot areas are equally hot with the hot areas ofFllrs; the cold areas fall short ofthe cold areas ofFllrs. Moreover, within the hot areas occur no cold spots, although sometimes you find a hot spot in the cold areas. The people are brown, tend to skinniness. They are submissive and blameless. The climate here is healthy, but I noticed some lepers.
p. 469 As for their sects: the majority are Shafiʿites except for Jlruft, and here are but few jurisprudents. The followers of the Traditions have begun to gain the ascendancy, except in Hurmūz. Moreover, the preachers are mostly uneducated. One of their scholars was mentioned to me in Kūh Binan, so I sought out a prayer house in which their leader was, with a group of the elders. I asked them about him, so they sent a man to invite him, and then they began questioning me, eventually asking me if the people ofJerusalem prayed turning towards the
379
THE REGION OF KIRMAN
Kaʿba, and other puzzlements like that. Said I, "Does this scholar ofyours hold sessions with you?" Said they, "Yes." Said I, "Ifhe has not taught you even that much there is no point in my meeting him." I encountered another in Bamm and nothing whatever came out of his preaching. I did not find any first class people among them, or any discussions on which you could depend; much less are there literary people. The Kharijites are in evidence in Bamm, and the mosque is off by itself, containing their treasury.
Addition/version MS. c
The sects. The overwhelming maturity among their sects belong to the adherents to Tradition, except for Jlruft, where it is to the Hanafites; however the people of the Tradition clearly are increasing in the region, other than at HurmOz. The followers of Abo Hanlfa also are numerous in the other districts; and you do not see many followers of other than the two sects, and Mu'atazilites, in Sirjan. The majority in al-Rodhbar, Qāhistiln, al-BalOs, al-ManOjan profess to be Shī'a.
The customs in this region: the people here are elegant in dress, resembling the people of Fars in most of their fashions. They do not realize from their dates what their palm trees produce; and sometimes you find dates in places such as ManOqan, and other such as it, at one hundred manns for a dirham. It is the practice of the camel drivers to take the dates to Khurasan on a fifty-fifty arrangement. Every year about one hundred thousand camels go there entering the place all of a sudden, and the ruler gives every camel driver a dīnār. Fornication and profligacy flourish at this time in Narmaslr, and I heard one of the camel drivers say that there was a woman there with whom every camel driver down to the last man of them had fornicated on that trip.
Addition/version MS. c
The customs in this region: The people here do not pick up from the ground the dates that fall, and sometimes you may find dates at one hundred manns for a dirham; moreover, even though production decreased those conditions still prevail. I heard some of them say that every year, between dates and costly Indian merchandise, about one hundred thousand loads are transported, the dates being on a fifty-fifty arrangement; sometimes they would enter the town at the same time. Someone said to me that when ʿAdhud al-Dawla entered the city the drovers came while he was there and he was awed by this. So he said:
“Let us depart from a city that such masses ofmen can enter so suddenly; and if they leave, a dīnār will be given every camel driver, from the treasury ofthe ruler.” Because of the presence of so many people Narmasir developed considerably. p. 470 Commerce is flourishing: dates are exported from here to Khurasan, and indigo to Fars, there being farms of this from the outskirts ofWalashjird to as far as HurmOz. From Bamm are exported turbans, scarves, taylasiins, and fine cloths more choice than all of those of Marw; quite a quantity of this cloth is made in al-Sirjan. Here too are made things also made in Qumm-some chairs, and the like, though not of quite so fine a quality. From the districts around Jlruft are
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
380
raised much indigo, cumin; and the people make sweetmeats and sugar syrup for sale at a low price. The most common food of the people of this district consists of durra and dates.
The specialties of this region include tutty [zinc and its oxide], made up into small tubes, and indeed it is called “tubular"; the workers make up what resemble large fingers of pottery on which they pour the material, which then sticks to the fingers, staying in tubular form. I saw them gathering the ore in the mountains, and they had built a remarkable, long furnace there where they refined it just as iron is refined. I saw this only in the villages. You find no sweeter dates than the dates here, and they cannot be eaten raw, being used only for pastries. There is nothing to compare with the eight kinds of sayhani dates of al-Madlna, the burdi date of al- Marwa, the musqir date ofWayla, the musin date of TJmiln, the ma<qili date of al-Basra, the aziid date of al-Kiifa, the inqilii date of Sughar, and the karmiishiini (kOmilshilnl?) date of this region.
The mann used here is that ofMakka; the measures vary; the counterpoise used is the Khurasanian.
Here are mines of iron and silver.
Most of the waters used here are derived from canals. No large river runs in the region. The river ofJlruft has a strong flow; one hears its tremendous falling and roaring as it drags the stones along. It is not possible for anyone to get down to It.
Addition/version MS. c
Commerce in this region: From the region dates are exported in great quantities, also syrup, and sweetmeats; from Narmaslr, costly Indian merchandise; from Sirjan, much cloth of the style made in Bamm, also chairs and the like; from Bamm itself, the most exquisite cloths, turbans, cloaks; from Jlruft, indigo, cumin, and other products. In the region are mines of iron and silver. It is, too, a source of sweetmeats and sugarcane. There is, too, stone that is collected from the mountains and is then refined just as iron is refined. They make up something resembling large fingers of pottery, on which they pour the material; this material is then pried from those fingers and is called “tubular”, because it remains in the form of tubes. Most of the production of this that I saw was done in the villages.
By far the commonest food in Jlruft is millet and dates.
The famous mountains in this region are the mountains of: al-Qufs, al-BalOs, al-Bilriz; and Silver Mine. The mountains of al-Qufs are to the north of the sea; behind them the hot area ofJlruft, and al-Riidhbilr. To the east is al-Akhwilsh, and a wilderness lies between al-Qufs and Makriln. To the west are al-BalOs and the districts of HurmOz;
p. 471
381
THE REGION OF KIRMAN
Addition/version MS. c.
The Qafs, a people known also as alKflj, are the most iniquitous creatures ofGod-may He be exalted; they are the most malicious in disposition, the least honourable, the most remorseless at heart. They inhabit these mountains, and so did al-BalOs until ʿAdhud al-Dawla destroyed them; and we will give a thorough discussion of their condition, in our account of the Desert. and here are said to be seven mountains, rich in date palms, fertility and farms, said to be virtually inaccessible. Most of the people there are skinny, tan in colour and perfect in features. They assert that they are Arabs, and we will make a thorough inquiry into their condition, in the wilderness, God willing. As for al-BalOs, ʿAdhud al-Dawla scattered them, taking them prisoner, and leading them into captivity; they had been quite strong, and al-Qufs used to fear them. They had grazing livestock and tents of hair, just like the Bedouin. The mountains of al-Bllriz are forested, and populated, as I have heard. They are also fairly inaccessible, but no one will be harmed among them, for they are newcomers to Islllm; Yaʿqiib and ʿAmr, the two sons of al-Layth, invaded them. Here are iron and other mines. The Mountains of the Mines are those in which there is silver, their length being about two stages. In Kirmlln are gorges, populated and forested, such as al-Darbllni (al-Darfllni), and others like it.
The language spoken here is understandable, being close to Khurasanian. Sometimes the language of the rural district is incomprehensible. The language of al-Qufs and of al-BalOs is not understandable, resembling that of al-Sind. Addition/version MS. c
As for their coinage: The Daylamites [Boyids] had struck dirhams like those called Qatari, bought at thirty to the dīnār. It circulates in the seven regions [ofthe non-Arabs]. They have another very good dirham here, also, called the ʿAdall.
The site of this region. Two-thirds of the region is hot, from Jlruft and the mountains of al-Qufs, and Dasht Bar(-In) and Ruwlst, and the districts and villages included in this area. The towns of Bamm are within it also as far as the edge of the desert and the borders of Makrlln. There is no cold area in what lies to the east beyond Jlruft and Bamm. To the west of Jlruft is a cold area, p. 472 and snow, between Jabal al-Fidhdha as far as Darbllnl (Darfanl), until you look down over Jlruft.
Al-Mijlln (Mizlln) is cold, and from here usually come the fruit and the snow for Jlruft. One-third of the region is cold area, from remote al-Sīrjān to the border of Fllrs, then to the wilderness on this side. Kuwllshlr (Bardaslr) is included here; Khabis, however, is in the hot area. This commentary of our report has possibly sometimes mentioned a cold area as being hot. East of the borders of Kirmlln is the country of Makrlln and its desert. The sea is beyond al-BalOs. To the west is the country of Fars, to the north is the wilderness; the sea is to the south of it.
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
382
Al Saman (Family of Saman) held the sovereignty over this region, and al Muʿtamid assigned it to Ismaʿll, in the year 290/902 when he defeated ʿAmr bin al-Layth. Then AbO ʿAlī bin Ilyas rebelled and assumed control; these rulers used to be mentioned by name in the Friday sermons. Then ʿAlī bin Buwayh took possession of it and it remains to the Būyids to the present. However, every year they bring to the ruler of Khurasan two hundred thousand dinars; nor did they take possession of the area without tremendous bloodshed and disruption of the population, most of the province being totally devastated. I read in a book in Fars a tradition linked to the Prophet-God’s peace and blessings be upon him: “I have a vision of the significance of the Daylamites in my community. They have protected their wealth, destroyed the mosques, raped the women, weakened Islam, eliminated prosperity, destroyed the armies, and no one will defeat them unless God orders. A man will emerge from the land of Khurasan, fair of countenance, a horseman, white on his cheeks, on his chest a black mole; handsome of stature, of great seriousness, a learned philosopher, his name Nabiyyun, of the offspring of the Persians. Through his hands God will open al-DarwQ;lzat al-Sughra [small gate of Khurasan], and he will take possession of Khurasan to al-Darwazat al-Kubra [large gate of Khurasan], and he will not put away his sword until not one remains who carries arms." It was said, “0 Messenger of God, what will be after that?" Said he, “The ruler ofKhurasan will go out to the house of God, and he will be mentioned in the Friday sermon on the pulpits in Khurasan, al-Zawraʾ, the land of Fars, al-ʿIrāq, and Makka, and al-Madlna." It was said, “0 Messenger of God, what will be after that?" “A long period will ensue when people will become like lions; they will not perform their obligations, nor will they safeguard what is holy.” p. 473 The land tax ofKirman is sixty thousand dirhams. The imposts at Shahrwa and Siirii are lighter than the imposts of Straf.
The distances in this region:
From Bardaslr to al-Sirjan, two stages.
From Bardaslr to the edge of the wilderness to Janzarūdh, one stage; thence to Zarand, one stage; thence to the wilderness, one stage.
From Narmaslr to al-Fahraj, one stage;
and this is on the edge of the wilderness.
From Narmasīr to JOy Sulayman, three stages; thence to Rikan, one stage; thence to Mūkhkan, one stage; thence to al-Tib, one stage;
383
THE REGION OF KIRMAN
thence to MarOghan, one stage;
thence to Bas, and Jakln, one stage;
thence to HarOk, one stage;
thence to Qasr Mahdl, one stage;
thence to HurmOz, one stage;
thence to al-Furdha [the gap], two post stages.
From al-Sirjan to Kahon, two stages; thence to Rustaq, one stage.
From al-Sirjan to Blmand, two post stages; thence to Kardakan, one post stage; thence to Unas, one stage; thence to al-Rodhan, two post stages.
From al-Sirjan to al-Shamat, one stage; thence to Bihar, one stage; thence to Khannab, one stage; thence to Ghubayra, one stage; thence to Koghon, one farsakh; thence to RaʾJn, one stage; thence to Sarwistan, one stage; thence to Darzhln, one stage; thence to Bamm, one stage.
From al-Sirjan to Firzln, two stages; thence to Mahan, one stage; thence to Khabls, three stages.
From Bamm to Narmaslr, one stage; and from Bamm to Darjln, one stage; thence to HurmOz, one stage; thence to Jlruft, one stage.
The Region of Al-Sind (Plain of Lower Indns)
p. 474
This is the region of gold and of commerce, of medicaments and simples, of sweetmeats and resources, of rice, bananas, and wondrous things. Here are low prices, prosperity, palms and dates; justice, fairness, and administration. Here are specialties, profitable things and merchandise; profits, glorious qualities, commerce, manufactures. Here is an important metropolis, notable cities, capitals. Good health is here, and trustworthiness. The sea adjoins it, the river flows through it. It contains palms; and plains, agricultural lands not needing irrigation. Here is an elegant metropolis, a noble river, uncommon things. However, its non-Muslims are polytheists, scholars there are few; moreover, you cannot reach it except after the dangers of the land and the terrors of the sea, after hardships and mental stress. Here is a representation of its form and features. [Map XIX]
We have made this region five districts, and have added Makran to it because it adjoins it, has an affinity with it; and so that the regions will be continuous with one another-but in God is success. The first area in front of Kirman is Makran [coastal province SE Iran]; then Tuwaran, then al-Sind, then Wayhind, then Qannawj (Kannawj), then al-Multan; we have included al-Multan also for the reason we just mentioned.
For it is as ifwe had returned to the borders ofKhurasan, and completed our account of the regions of the non-Arabs, all of them; and we have excepted no Islamic country.
You should know that I have visited the frontiers of this region, have reached all its shores, and have seen and heard what I am about to recount. I asked many questions about the names of places here, and examined accounts of it; I have learned of its cities. Nevertheless, I do not vouch for the description of it as I vouch for that of the other regions. I describe only the metropoles, not going into an examination of any commentary that was related to me—it is sufficient to make a man a liar if he but relates everything he hears. And there is the saying of the Prophet—God's peace and blessings be upon him: “Merely getting a report does not compare with direct observation.” Indeed, were it not for fear that this work of ours would be deficient, so that only the original Islamic lands would be in it, I should refrain from mention of this region altogether. The model and pattern have been made according to what I have derived from a person of understanding who has known this region, and has traveled over it. Most of the analogies I made in exemplifying the regions I did not use until I had checked with the judicious persons of that region, and had recourse to the people of understanding there; and I have derived much concerning this region from the work oflbrahlm bin Muhammad al-Farisl [allstakhrl] whom we call al-Karkhl, on whom we have depended-but in God is our recourse.
As for Makran, its capital is BannajbOr, and among its towns are: Mashka, Klj, Sari, Shahr, Barbūr (Zhanzhūr), Khwash, Damindan, Jalak, Dazak, Dasht
P. 475
.ل977ل\
385
THE REGION OF AL-SIND
Map XIX: Al-Sind (see p. 423).
From MS. Sprenger 5—Ahlwardt 6034 by kind permission ofthe Staatsbibliothek Preussischer Kulturbesitz, Berlin, Orientabteilung.
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
386
ʿAll, al-Tīz; and the Persian [allstakhrl] mentions, KabartUn, Rasak-which he P. 476 said is the town of exit-also Bih, Band, Qasr-Qand, Asflqa, Fahal-Fahra, Qanbala, Armilbll (Armilʾll). Among the foremost he mentions al-Tlz, Mashka, and Dizak, but he says nothing further about them.
As for Tuwilriln, the capital is Quzdilr, and among its towns are: Qandilbll, Bajathrad, Jathrad, Bakilniln, KhOzl, Rustilkuhan, Rustilq ROdh, Murdiln, Rustilq Milsakiln, KahrkOr. The Persian [allstakhrl] also mentions: Mahilll, Kizkilniln, Sura [ShOra], Quzdilr, and mentions no others.
As for al-Sind, its capital is al-MansOra; and among its cities are: Daybul, p. 477 Zandarlj, Kadilr, Milyil, Tanball; and allstakhrl also mentions al-NlrOn (BirOn), Qallarl, Annarl, Ballarl, al-Maswilhl, al-Bahraj, Bilniya, Manjilbarl (Manhiltarl), SadOsiln, al-R0r (ArOr), SObilra, Klnils, Saymūr.
As for Wayhind, allstakhrl calls it al-Hind, saying that the cities of al-Hind are: Qamuhul, Kanbilya, Sobilra, Sandlin, SaymUr, al-Multiln,JandarOr, Basmad; then said he, these are the cities of this country. I asked a man of knowledge and judgment who used to teach in ShlrilZ and al-AhwilZ, and who used to relate narratives, who acknowledged that he was an ascetic, and who, moreover, had lived in those countries a long time-said I “Describe to me those areas in a way that I can put into my book, and give such a good account of it so that I may, as it were, see them." Similarly, I asked another legist of the followers of Abu al-Haytham from Naysilbūr, and he had traveled in those areas, and knew the conditions there. From what the two told me I verified that Wayhind is the capital, and among the cities are: Widhiln, Bitar, NOj, Lawilr, Samiln, KOj. p. 478 As for Qannawj (Kannawj), that is also the name of its capital; among its cities are: Qadilr, Abilr, Kahilra, Bilrd, Wujayn, Oriha, Zaho, Har, Barhlrawil, but al-Istakhrl does not mention these at all.
As for al-Multiln, that is also the name of its capital; among its cities are: Barilr, Ramildhiln, Warwln, BarUr.
Bannajbnr is the capital of Makran, with a fortress built of clay, around which is a moat. It is situated among palm trees, and has two gates: Bilb Tnriln, Bilb al-Tīz. The drinking water here is derived from a river. The mosque is in the midst of the markets. They are a barbarous lot being Muslim in name only. Their language is BalOchl.
Al-Tīz is on the sea; it has an abundance of palms, excellent caravanserais, and a handsome mosque. The people are a middling lot, no science, no finesse; even so, it is a famous seaport.
Quzdilr (Qusdilr) is the capital of TOriln. Situated in desert, it has two sections between which is a dry wildī without bridges. On one side is the palace of the ruler, also a fort. The other side is called BOdin, in it the houses of the merchants, and the depots; this is the more spacious and cleaner part. The capital, though small, has much to offer, and caravans go there from Khurilsiln, Filrs, Kirmiln, and from the districts of al-Hind. The water there, however, is vile, and if someone should drink of it his stomach swells. Their ruler is just
387
THE REGION OF AL-SIND
and unpretentious. The buildings ofits towns are ofclay. The drinking water is derived from underground canals-these are in the deserpexcept for Kathrad (Jathrad) and Klzkanan-both ofthese have a stream; Kathrad has wells, also. The farm areas ofboth these towns have a healthy climate. All the towns are hot, except Kathrad-it is cold; in fact sometimes snow falls there, and the water freezes. p. 479	Al-MansOra is the capital of al-Sind, and is the metropolis of the region.
It is somewhat like Damascus. The buildings here are of wood and clay, the mosque of stone and baked brick. The mosque is large like that of ʿUman, built on pillars of teak. The town has four gates: Bab al-Bahr, Bab Toran, Bab Sandan, Bab al-Multān. A river encircles the area. The people are characterized by refinement and good character, and are favourable towards Islam. Many learned people are there, commerce is profitable; they are a people of intelligence, charm, knowledge and kindness. The climate is mild, the winter easy, the rains abundant. Many different kinds of things are assembled here, and some remarkable special things. Large buffaloes are here. The drinking water is derived from the Mihran River (Indus). The mosque is amidst the markets. In manners the people here resemble those of al-ʿIraq, having humbleness, and noble natures. However, the heat is great there, bedbugs are everywhere, and the people are phlegmatic. Most of them are infidels; their borders have been ravaged, and few noble people are left there.
Daybul is on the sea, with about a hundred villages surrounding it; most of the people are infidels. The water beats against the walls of the town. It has an entirely merchant population, speaking both Sindl and Arabic. It is the port of the area, giving rise to a considerable income. There the Mihran (Indus) flows into the sea, yet the mountains are within shouting distance. The market is right on the sea. Here are a people of elegance and fine dress.
Tanball has a fortress; maritime; few Muslims here; the merchants are well-supplied.
Wayhind is an important capital, bigger than al-MansUra, possessing many superb gardens and situated on level ground. Here are flowing rivers, abundant rains. Many varieties of things are assembled here, with superb fruits, trees all around, evident prosperity, low prices. Three manm of honey cost a dirham, p. 480 and you need not ask about the cheapness of the bread and dairy products! The people are free of troubles and have rid themselves of infirmities. The trees grow thick all around here, including walnuts and almonds, with plenty of dates and bananas. The air, however, is humid, and the heat oppressive. The building here are of straw and wood, and sometimes fire breaks out in the cane buildings. The city is like Fasa and SabOr, were it not for these problems.
Qannawj (Kannawj) is a large capital with a central town and suburbs. Meats are abundant there, water flows freely, and gardens are all around about. The people are beautiful of countenance, the water is safe to drink. It is an extensive place, with profitable commerce. Everything is fresh there, and bananas are cheap. However, conflagrations are common, flour is scarce, their food being
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
388
rice. The people wear loincloths. The buildings are wretched, the summers abominable. From the city to the mountains is four farsakhs. The mosque is in the suburbs. Meats are cheap. The river penetrates the town. The main food of the Muslims is wheat. There are scholars and important people here.
Qadar is a delightful place with an excellent climate; many gardens. The rulers of the capital go out there to summer, during the great heat, and the people of the other cities of the hot area do likewise. The drinking water is from streams and canals.
Al-Multlln is like al-MansOra, except that it is more populous. Though it has not much fruit yet prices are low: bread is thirty manns for a dirham, and you get three manns of sweetmeats for a dirham. The houses are handsome like those of Slrllf, built of teakwood, and with a number of storeys. There is neither fornication nor drunkenness here; and anyone the people catch doing those things they kill, or imprison. They do not lie in their selling, nor lessen their measures, nor diminish their weights. They love the strangers. Most of them are Arabs. The drinking water here is from a copious stream. Produce is abundant there, commerce flourishing, prosperity evident; the rulers are just. You do not see a woman dressed up in the markets, nor would anyone speak to her publicly. The water is wholesome, living is pleasant and elegant. They are a fine people, speaking understandable Fllrsl, practicing considerable commerce, and with healthy bodies. However, the town is situated in a dirty salt pan, the houses are narrow, the air is hot and dry. The people are brown or black. And this is what I know of the description of the towns of this region.
A Summary Account of Conditions in this Region This is a hot region, with palms, coconuts, bananas. Here are places with an equable climate. This is a community of much diversity, as for example at Wayhind, and the districts ofal-MansOra. The sea reaches the greater portion of it, but I do not know of any lake there. It has, however, a number of rivers. The non-Muslims here worship idols. Preachers here are not respected, nor do the people have any characteristics you would recount.
As for their religious schools-most of the Muslims here are Sunnl; and I saw the Qadhl AbO Muhammad al-MansOrl, a DawOdite, acting as leader in his school. He provides instructions and composition there, and has produced a number of very good books. The people ofal-Multan are Shlʿa; they say hayya <ala al-saliit! hayya <ala al-faliih! (Come to prayer! Come to salvation!) in the adhiin, and they say the iqiima twice. The capitals do not lack jurists of the school of AbO Hanlfa-may God show him mercy; but there are neither Malikites nor Muʿtazilites there, nor are there Hanbalites; for the people are on the True Path. The schools there are praiseworthy, there is uprightness and decency, and God has kept them free of excess and fanaticism, confusion, and discord.
p. 481
389
THE REGION OF AL-SIND
From Tuwaran are exported sweetmeats of the finest quality; from Masakan and Sandan, much rice and cloth. In the rest of the region some mats are made, and the same sorts of things as are made in Quhistan, and Khurasan. A great amount of coconuts is exported, as are fine cloths. From al-MansOra are exported expensive Indian sandals; also from here elephants, ivory, and other precious things, and effective medicaments.
The mann used in Tuwaran is that of Makka, likewise in al-Multan, al-Sind, and al-Hind.
The measures used: that in Tuwaran is called the kayji, and is the equivalent of forty manns of wheat; one may find between eight and four kayjis for one dirham. The standard of measure in al-Multan is called matal, and equals twelve manns of wheat.
Addition/version MS. c.
The mann used in Tuwaran is that of Makka; and the name of the standard measure of al-Multiln is mata/, and it equals twelve manns of wheat, and their mann is that of Makka. The people of Tuwilriln use the kayi, the equivalent of forty-nine manns of wheat; one may find between eight and four kayfīs for one dirham.
The dirhams of al-Sind are called qiihariyiit, at five to the dirham. Also used in the tiitarii which is the equivalent of a dirham and two thirds. The dirhams of al-Multan are the same as the dirhams of the Fatimids. The use of the qahariyiit has spread here; that used in Ghaznln resembles the quriidh of Yaman; still the qarawiyya is the more important there.
Addition/version MS. c
The coinage in this region Their coins are the dirhams called Qandahiiri, weighed at five to the dirham; also used is the tiJtarii, the equivalent of a dirham and two thirds. The rat/s of al-Multan and the coins in circulation there are like those used by al-Maghribl [the Fatimids], and the Qandahiiri is current there also.
The specialties in this region. Here is a fruit called a lemon, something like the apricot, and very sour. Another fruit, something like the plum, is called a mango, and is delicious. The falij [large two humped camel] which you see in the Orient and Fars covers the Bactrian female, being bigger than the male Bactrian. It has two humps, and is a first class animal. It is not used by anyone, indeed no one owns it, except kings; only it sires the Bactrian. Superb Indian sandals are made here also.
Addition/version MS. c
The customs in this region: The people commonly let their hair grow quite long. They wear a garment called the qurtaq, and they pierce their ears in the manner of the people of al-Hind. They commonly wear a loincloth, except for
p. 482
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
390
the merchants and people in high office; rarely do they go shod. The people of al-Multan do not commonly tuck their turbans under the chin. The people of Makran are ignorant, brown in complexion, and their speech is like the sounds of birds.
The people ofMakrān are stupid, brown in colour, wild of speech. They dress in a garment called qariitiq, wear their hair long, and pierce their ears, just as do the people of al-Hind; most of the areas of the region are just as we have reported. The Mihran River (Indus) does not differ from the Nile at all, in point of the sweetness of the water, its rising, and the presence of crocodiles in it. Its source is from the district where appear some of the branches of the Jayhūn, before al-Wakhsh. It appears in the area of al-Multan, then flows to the borders of al-Mansūra, and enters the sea at Daybul. Farms depend on its floods, just as we reported for Egypt. The river Sandarūd, about three stages distant from al-Multan, is large, and its water, sweet.
As for the idols in this region, there are two in Habrawa made of stone: no one approaches them. They have a power such that should a man try to lay his hand on one, it will be held back and will not reach the idol. They both appear as though made of gold and silver. It is said that if one expresses a wish in their presence, the request will be granted. Here is a spring ofwater, green like verdigris, colder than ice, and the stones in it will heal wounds. The eunuchs live on the profits of fornication, and many are the endowments from fornication here. Anyone who wishes to consecrate his daughter establishes a waqf there. The two statues are quite enchanting. I saw a Muslim man who said he had forsaken Islam to return to the worship of the idols, having been captivated by them; when he returned to Naysabūr he became Muslim again. The two idols really are miraculous! In importance after those two is the idol of al-Multan, and the whole district is devoted to it. It is sometimes called Faraj Bayt al-Dhahab (relief of the house of gold), because when the Muslims conquered al-Multan they were in poor circumstances, but they found enough gold there to enrich them. The temple of this idol is a palace built in the most flourishing part of the markets. In the middle of it is a handsome dome around which are the dwellings of the eunuchs. The idol is under the dome in the form of a man sitting cross-legged on a chair, made of plaster and brick, and he is dressed in pelts that look like those of the red squirrel; no part of him is seen except his eyes, and these are jewels. On his head is a crown of gold. His arms are stretched out on his knees, and the fingers of his hands are folded as if he were counting four. The idols other than these are inferior to them.
p. 483
p. 484
The vegetated areas are Makran, al-Rahūq, al-Daybul, Armabll (Armaʾll), Qanbala, these having the best climate. The grazing is extensive, with great numbers of cattle, though these live in filthy conditions. There are emporiums
391
THE REGION OF AL-SIND
and ports. Sandlln, SaymOr, and KanbAya are fertile places; prices are low, and they are sources of rice and honey. Near the banks ofthe Mihrlln are desert areas with many nomads. Most of the areas of MakrAn are areas of desert, drought, and poverty. Here it is hot, open country, with one district called al-KhurOj (the exit), with its city RAsak; another town called KharzAn. From the direction of KirmAn, the district of Mashka adjoins it, three stages wide; few palm trees are there, although there is some assortment of products. Most ofMakrAn, however, is desert. Where there is a cultivated area the climate is healthy. It has swamps like the swamps of al-ʿIrAq, deserts like those of the Kurds. Here are many Zutt (gypsies) living in reed huts, feeding on fish and waterfowl.
Al-Rāhūq and Kalwān are two rural areas adjoining and added to MakrAn. Some consider al-RAhOq as associated with al-MansOra؛ in any case it produces little ftuit. The biggest town in Makran is al-FannazbOr (Bannajbor); in it are palms. Here is also al-QuzdAr, fertile, with low prices; here are to be found grapes, and many different kinds of products, but no date palms.
As for the situation of this region: east of it is the Sea of Fārs, west of it, KirmAn, and the desert of Sijistlln, with its provinces. To the north are the other countries of al-Hind, and to the south is the desert between Makran and the mountains of al-Qufs, beyond which is the Sea ofFArs. However, the Sea ofFArs surrounds the eastern parts of these countries, and the southern parts beyond these deserts, since this sea reaches from SaymOr on the east to Tlz, the port of MakrAn, then turns around this desert so that it curves around the territories of Kirmlln and FArs.
The towns in the area of MakrAn are: al-Tīz, Kabartiin, Dazak, RAsak, Bih, Band, Qasr-Qand, Asfiqa, Fahal-Fahra, MashkA, QanbalA, ArmAbll (ArmAʾJl). Different forms of government are present in this region. There is an p. 485 independent ruler over MakrAn: he is a humble, just man whose like you do not see. Over al-Mansiira, however, is a ruler from the Quraysh [tribe]. Here the Friday prayer is for the ʿAbbAsids, though it used to be for ʿAdhud al-Dawla; I saw their messenger who had come to his son while I was in ShlrAz. In al-MultAn the prayer is for the FAtimids, and they neither dissolve nor make contracts except in that name, and their messengers are constantly going to Egypt with gifts. The present ruler is a powerful and a just man. The ascendancy in Qannawj (Kannawj) and in Wayhind is in the hands of unbelievers; the Muslims have an independent ruler of their own.
Addition/version MS. c.
[Al-MansOra] was ruled by a people ofthe Qaraysh, and the Friday prayer is for the house of al-ʿAbbits, though on the littoral it used to be for ʿAdhud al-Dawla;
I saw their chief at the house of his son in Shlraz, appealing for help for a youth who had rebelled against him. As for al-Makran, it had a powerful ruler, but I
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
392
heard that at the present day the Friday prayer there is for al-Maghribl [the Fatimids]. At Kannawj most of the people are infidels, and the Muslims there also have an independent ruler; similarly at Wayhind. As for al-Multan, its ruler has given his allegiance to al-Maghribl, and the Friday prayer is in his name; moreover, communication never ceases between them, nor the exchange of gifts; neither do they appoint a governor without a directive from him.
Taxes. On a load entering Tuwaran an impost of six dirhams is levied; similarly on a load going out. On a slave is an impost of twelve dirhams, but only on his entry. On a load coming from al-Hind is a tax of twenty dirhams; on a load from al-Sind the tax is according to values of the quantities of imports. On a dyed leather the tax is a dirham. Every year the revenue there is a million dirhams, reckoned by the decimal system.
The distances in this region:
From Tlz Makran to Kls (Klj), five stages; thence to Fannazbur, two stages; thence to Dazak, three stages; thence to Rasak, a like distance; thence to Fahal-Fahra, a like distance; thence to Asfiqa, two stages; thence to Band, one stage; thence to Bih, one stage; thence to Qasr-Qand, one stage; thence to Armabll, six stages; thence to Daybul, four stages.
From al-Tīz to Quzdar on the coast across the length of Makran, twelve stages. p. 486 From al-MansOra to Daybul, six stages;
from al-Mansūra to al-Multan, twenty stages;
from al-MansOra to the boundary of al-Budha, five stages;
thence to al-Tlz, fifteen stages.
From al-Multan to Ghaznln is a distance of eighty farsakhs through steppe and desert; a charge of one hundred fifty dirhams is levied on a load, apart from the money for safe passage. Sometimes the road is cut off by brigands for three months at a time.
From al-Multan to al-MansOra, by way of villages and cultivated areas, forty farsakhs; and it is one hundred through the steppe, with little cultivation.
From al-MansOra to Quzdar, eighty farsakhs;
thence to Kankaban (Kandaban), a like distance;
393
THE REGION OF AL-SIND
thence to Slwah, a like distance;
thence to the city of Walashtan, a like distance;
thence to Saghan, sixty farsakhs■. in the midst of this town is a mosque; thence to Ghazln, one stage.
From Quzdar to Mashka, fifty farsakhs; thence to Jalak, thirty farsakhs; thence to Khwash, a like distance; thence to Sari Shahr, one farsakhs; thence to Nahr (Joy) Sulayman, a like distance; thence to Darhfll, fifty farsakhs; and to Jlruft, a like distance.
From al-Multan to Balis, ten stages; thence to Qandabll, four; thence to Quzdar, five.
From Qandabll to al-MansOra, eight [stages]; or to al-Multlln, fifteen, through desert areas; and from al-MansOra to Qamuhul, eight stages; thence to Kanbaya, four stages;
thence to Sobll.ra, a like distance, and this town is about a farsakh from the sea.
From Sandlln to Saymiir, five stages; thence to Sarandlb, fifteen stages.
From al-Multan to Basmad, two stages; thence to al-Ror (Aror), three stages; thence to Annarl, four stages; thence to Qallarl, two stages; thence to al-Mansora, one stage; thence to Qamuhul, one stage.
The Desert that Lies Awong these Regions
p. 487
You should know that among the regions of the non-Arabs, except al-Rihab and Khuzistan, is a desert, oblong in shape, that is right in the middle of them. No river flows there, nor is there a lake; no rural areas, no towns. Very few people live there, but brigands are many! The roads are difficult, and areas of jurisdiction are not clear. The mountains are frightening, villages far apart from one another, places virtually impossible to get to. Roads are blocked off by robbers, springs are a trickle. However, the cisterns, with their protective domes on the roads
through this desert, are frequent, and the distances between the cisterns short.
In various places in the desert are salt marshes, sand dunes, some creeks, and some fearsome desolation. Most of it pertains to Khurasan, some each to Kirman, Fars, al-Jibal, al-Sind, and Sijistan; on this account there is much brigandage, since, when they are cut off in one jurisdiction they flee to another,
Addition/version MS. c.
... until ʿAdhud al-Dawla carried out a military expedition against them, extirpated al-Balos, ravished al-Qafs, takingeighty youths from them as hostages; and to the present time they are kept in prison in Shiraz. They are sent back after a set time, and another eighty take their place; in this way the interests of the Daylamites are safeguarded from that direction; and the aggression occurs in the districts of Khurasan...
and hide in the mountain of Karkas Kūh or Siyah Kūh where they cannot be overcome, or even reached.
Addition/version MS. c
Discussion of al-Qufs arose one day in the assembly of Abu al-Fadhl bin Nahama in ShlrilZ. He said that they displayed the courage oflions only because of the heedlessness of the ruler of Khurasan in respect of them. Said 1: “God support the shaykh! But you have the source of the spring and the fountainhead of the people [Qafs] under your control, and so the blame, then, is to lie on the ruler of Khurasan?” On the contrary, the remarkable fact concerning the Daylamites is how they have left them in the midst of their territories, and have demarcated the boundaries of their communities asfar as the desert.
No towns . are here except Safld, and this is on the border of Sijistan. But all around on the edges of the desert are well-known towns; pertaining to Kirman are: Khabls, Zawar, Narmaslr, Kūh Binan; to Fars are: Yazd, Kathah, CUqda, Zarand; to Isfahan is: Ardistan; to al-Jilbal are: Qumm, Qashan, Dizah; to Quhistan are Tabas, Kurl, Qayin, Khūr; and to al-Daylam is Biyar.
The desert is like the sea, and you may travel in it in any direction you wish, if you know your course. However, the roads we have shown on our map have become well-known and much used, because of the domed cisterns that are maintained there [Map XX]. And if we ... [lacuna in MS.] ... so that we were to
p. 488
395
THE DESERT THAT LIES AMONG THESE REGIONS
٠ر ١ ن 1\\
Map XX: The Persian Desert (see p. 424).
From Ayasofya, 2971 m. by kind permission of T.C. Basbakanlik, Kiiltiir Miistesarligi, Siileymaniye Kiitiiphanesi Miidiirliigi, Istanbul, Turkey.
pvau I Uf ااأ3 ٩٥٥٩ اأ3 ٩SB tucSpo puB 3UU paqoBouddv؛٧no٩B 3UU 3u sāuiqu auuos og pjnoo I uvqu PJBSI puB ‘uuaqu pvau pjnoo oqw ااأ3دou 3UU qoou ااأ3؛ل puB ‘japcai „داأ3دpunoj سلأبم auuos sn puB s٩oo٩ ااأ3دSuotiuB paqsv ااأ3 UBUU B JOJ suauosjud U3„BJ pcq oqw tulisnj^ V ؛OJU أبمولل 3UU PJOU spuvq ااأ3 ٥j))MO؛Bg Su؛p اأ3ء ٧3vud؛33 J؛p؛JJ3J3٧d ‘3u؛UOOJ uo o3 ou 3u؛ 330!St؛٩p!U0 اا31دU؛MS 3p؛٧J-S3SSB p3٧٥OJ ٧no٩B JOJ sijqvsivf XuuoAii داأ3دj JOJ qsiM ou OABIJ؛p؛op JOU ‘sjbuuiub 3u ااأ3د U3٩M ااأ3دUBUU B aunudvo ااأ3د٩؛unu uujq p سلاا، uuaqu ٧o٥j3٧B٩ POAUBUS-JR puB jsnw uo uaqsuvq 3JE puB؛suu ااأ3دUBtp ounudBD ااأ3دJO SUBOBUUO^J uo 3UB د5٩٧0
tpiijM uo ‘snjoj aqu JO sjnu ااأ3دpaaj داأ3دjnd ااأ3؛ل U٧BJSI؛3 qujvj ؛33UB^3٩B u‘ ؛j3jjns u؛usujqu puB uoSunq āu داأ3؛ل pooj ؛s ؛U3A3 ‘puy UB3 Xotp SuiquiuB usn ااأ3 اا31 j٩؛uou op spuc3 ؛3U3JU3UU س1أبم ٧I• hiunpuausouuoijuo.iBAoMi؛ JO po٥؛saunuBOJD s UUOUJ puvnSpoq B 3ABI| SUBABJBOJI UBtp OS—sooa dnoaā uaquouE ااأ3 sugjjo uajnu داأ3 puB ‘sauuoo dnouS 3U(^s33B٧soq SB uuaqujo uaquunu B SBq skjB sugjjo uajnu uvqu 3SUOM ااأ3دpntjpVj ipun ءل-هءسلءuuaqu 3UUB3U3AO؛ اأ3 اأ؛اOSJB suatpo asaqu' دا31د لاةا٧1 س1أبم SMOUUB‘ ٧n٩ اا31د SpUOMS OABq OSJB دا31 SQJBg (لأءأ3٠ا1ل) 3U3M J3A3U31JM pile ‘S3AJ3SUU31JU اا31دjn[ 3UO UJ JJO jno 3UE؛pS؛J3؛UO اا31دلا33 JOqUOUB ou■ XpjBJ Xjoa داأ3دq؛q 3At؛p؛S33Bjd 3u ؛u اا31 B٧unouu؛su ؛ipitjAt u ااأ3دAjpjoj UB3 OS SBM UI PJBS ااأ3؛ل aq uou pjnow spuoMS ٩)udaoxa uuaqu UUOUJ sadrasa 3UO ON p3٧un pile iE3٩؛3u ؛٧ سلأبم puun atuojs B ؛٧ ٧no٩B uuaqu paqsv I suqds q٧؛٧3B٧d S؛33؛ puB ااأ3د ؛nd uuaqu 33S no^ soqBus ipq pjnow no^ SB usn„؛3u ااأ3 ‘poj B uo UBUU BJO peaq
3S؛S -Quu 3Z|؟/'
jaipej ٧اأ3ا punod ٧اأ3؛٧ }sntju puB sprat ٧اأ3ى 1٩|| UUSIJU؛ uosusd Z٧3A3 pUB ٧ا31ا UBip OS ' " ٧ا31ا uou op ٩؛|| سز٧ا1 ١3 uodean B,‘Ul|3٩MJ3٨0 ،sip SSOIJU JO 3UO ,ij3 f,.fpp^.fS4aa/tt٠.'3 SIV u٠ ‘3UU03J3A0 Xotp aUO^UB
٥8t d 3UO ou ajcds؛ uou 3٩؛paysjuBS āu سلأبم؛usn ج3„؛٧أ3 ااأ3 auouu^‘ ااأ3دqiEop ou atuojs ؛uuou3؛u؛dnouS sno سلأبم tginou puB atuojjs ‘suuvaq ssapuajau ‘S33BJ injutgiuj• داأ3د سا،0 uo puaosap اا31 UUOUJ SpeOJ اا31 B٧unouu؛JO su !{؛uguuu دا31د UB 3UE الاN؟/s؛pUB ‘U٠٩ ٧ا31ا SB JEJ SB 3U3tp UUOUJ SuO.B SAOUU ٧ا31 ujasap‘ |؛3٩ susnool'
دا31؟3 ^SJl ؛lju،٩؛U ٧ا31 B٧UnOUU؛SU ؛j u{؛tuj؟pB ‘u؛٧U33B ou ٧ا31 p؛U٧S؛٧3 ujnuifjo f,.fpp^.S4aa/tt٠!.3 sw u٠'
‘sjriQiB pajiBO ajdoad BJO
sugj‘ ااأ3 JO UBtp usauuoqs ^؛U3A3M.H 'Uguuu؛ اا31د ou IJB 3UE papvaup 3٩ 3SnB33٩ اا31 SB3؛٧S3 peOJ padojOAop usouu pile ؛JO uvqu s ءأ-لأددااا31 JO JBIJU ujnoyjjp usotu suujBd 3٧vp ‘saoBjd uoq ‘saoBjd Ploo ‘suBdujBS ujnoyjip ‘sasscd‘ ا؛للءج3' JBIJU MBS I UJ •uuatp uunoo uou pjnoo I ؛B٧unouu IJB s؛snou‘ سلأبم B ل؛اال3 ujEiunotu ^SB3 ‘puBS uuo3؛UJ UgqBJSJ ou asop 3u q٧؛pUB spvou S٧IJO ^UBUU OS MBS I Xbas s m٧؛٧s؛JBIJU s3u 3UO ‘uaqUOUB ou E3UE 3UO UUOUJ ٧؛3UU ة3„؛1٧ة ou uo اا31 ^؛uaquouE ‘pcoj uguuu ٧؛3UU I ل3وا^puB ‘sugj JOJ papvaq SBqBj س3 ٧U3A3S uuads^ s^cp ؛u ااأ3 AJ3MS uuasap؛3u JO ؛٧ ٠usnq^ pUB JgXig ou؛؛٧U3٧٧B ^UB s^cd 3UO ou S33Bjd puB pu؛ou U٥ 3U٠ ٧؛3UU X3 pUB spvou S٧I IJB Moqs؛S٧‘ اا31 pjnow J3M3JA UB paZBUUB 3٩ اا1ءا؛ spvou JOJ ق0 jno
ع96
SN0IO3H 3HL JO ao٥a٦^ON^ د0لا SNOISIAia Lsaa 3HL
397
THE DESERT THAT LIES AMONG THESE REGIONS
in it. Said he, ‘What do you say about our blocking off the roads and killing?’ Said I, ʿAnyone who does these things merits from God detestation, and most grievous punishments in the next world.’ The other sighed deeply and toppled over onto the ground, his face turning yellow from the fear of God. Then he released me with a group of the people." I have heard a group of merchants say that, according to the robbers themselves, they take only ill-gotten money, and they consider what they take to be their right, and in fact an obligation on them.
The biggest and most forbidding of the mountains in the desert is Karkas Kūh [kūh = mountain], and to its area pertains the portion of this desert that is towards al-Rayy. It is not that it is so big, but rather that its ascent is very much interrupted, there being many steep inclines, turns, lurking-holes, and secret, out of the way hiding places. Near it, as we have said, is Siyilh Kūh: it is smaller than the other, but is, for all that, forbidding. The highway of al-Rayy lies between the two mountains, going near Qasr al-Jiss, and here is a low-lying area.
In the desert are some remarkable sights. About two farsakhs from Raʾs al-Maʾ toward Khurilsiln are small black stones for a distance of about four farsakhs. Near Qabr (the grave of) al-Hiljji toward Barask are small pebbles some of which are white like camphor, some of a green color, like glass. Between Khurilsiln and Kirmiln are stone images of almonds, apples, lentils, vegetables, and a number of men. A remarkable castle is here in which are statues, wearing very fine necklaces; it is really amazing, and I have never seen anything like it.
Addition/version MS. c.
Near al-Jarmaq are some black mounds which people assert are the ashes of the fire of Abrahamten whom be peace! We have established that the well-known routes here are four in number, and they are the main roads; we mention, moreover, those of the secondary roads that should be mentioned. The first of the major routes is that of Isfahan, then the route of Filrs, then the route of Kirmiln, then the route of al-Sind, all of which go out to the districts of Khurilsiln, and al-Dilmghiln, and al-Jibal.
As for the route oflsfahiln, it is to al-Rayy and to NaysilbOr; the route ofFilrs is to NaysilbOr, and to Kohistiln, and to Dilmghiln, with a number of secondary roads. The route of al-Sind is to NaysilbOr and to Kohistiln, with a branch to Harilt. The route of Kirmiln is to Khurilsiln and to Sijistiln, which is further away, but it goes to al-Sind only from Sijistiln; and there is no exit from Sijistiln to Filrs, except in Kirmiln.
Distances on the route of al-Rayy:
From al-Rayy to Dizak, one stage; thence to Dayr al-Jiss, one stage; thence to Kilj, one stage; thence to Qamm, one stage;
p.490
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
398
thence to Qaryat al-MajOs, one stage; thence to Qāshan, two stages; thence to Hisn Badra, a like distance; thence to Ribat Ibn Rustam, one stage; thence to Danijl, one stage; thence to al-Yahfldiyya, one stage.
Distances on the route of NaysabOr:
From Turthlth to Ribat Zanjl, one stage; thence to Bann, one stage; thence to Darzlnak, one stage; thence to Nakhanl, one stage; thence to Hulwān, one stage; thence to another Bann, one stage; thence to Jah Rlk, one stage; thence to Barmshlrak, one stage; thence to Loklr, one stage; thence to al-Akhra, one stage; thence to Hawdh al-Hajab, one stage; thence to Jarmaq, one stage; thence to al-Maʾ al-Harr, one stage; thence to Khan Wardawayh, one stage; thence to Hljarmakh, one stage; thence to Hawdh ʿAll, one stage; thence to Kflshkan, one stage; thence to al-Rakūnln, one stage; thence to Saksh, one stage; thence to al-Yahadiyya, one stage.
Another route:
From Turthlth to Bann, six stages; thence to Bustadaran, one stage; thence to Sarlsh, one stage; thence to Rustaq Tabas (al-Tamr), one stage; thence to Ribat Karan, one stage; thence to Arazama, one stage; thence to al-Mahallabl, one post stage; thence to Ribat :lb .Shuturān, one stage; thence to Ribat Busht Badham, one stage; thence to Saghand, one stage; thence to Khazāna, one stage; thence to Anjlrah, one stage.
Distances on the route of al-Damgh:ln:
From al-Damghan to Wandah, forty farsakhs; thence to Jarmaq, fifty farsakhs.
399
THE DESERT THAT LIES AMONG THESE REGIONS
Distances on the route of Kohistiln:
From Kurl to MaCzal, one stage; thence to itb Shor, one stage; thence to Hawdh Hazilr, one stage; thence to Jith Bur (Bi’r Bur), one stage; thence to Ghamr Surkh, one stage; thence to MaCzal, one stage; thence to Blra, one stage; thence to Shor DuwilZdah, one stage; thence to Darkojuwil, one stage; thence to Zilwar, one stage; thence to Khabls, one stage.
Another route:
From Kurl to Koh Biniln, sixty farsakhs■; on this route are numerous domed wells and cisterns; at a distance of two stages from Koh Biniln is a spring of water.
Another route of Haritt:
From Harilt to Qaryat Silm, ten stages; thence to Raʾs al-Maʾ, four stages; thence to Dilristiln, one stage; thence to Narmilslr, one stage.
Distances on the route of Harilt:
From Qaryat Silm to Sabld, five stages;
thence to Narmilslr, five stages, with some rather weak springs, and a few domed wells.
Distances on the route of Sijistiln:
From Zaranj to Sabld, a journey of five days; the new road is that from Harilt to Qāryat Silm.
Distances on the route of Khabls:
From Khabls to all-DarwilZak, one stage; thence to Shor Rodh, one stage; thence to Bilrask, one stage;
thence to Nlma, thence to al-Hawdh (the cistern), one stage; thence to Raʾs al-Mitʾ, two stages; thence to Kokor, one stage; thence to Khawst, one stage.
As for the route of al-Sind, it goes to Kirmiln and Sijistiln; I did not travel over it, nor did I acquire a precise knowledge of it.
400 THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS p. 491 As for a description ofthe way stations ofwhich we began to give an account: Dayr al-Jiss has buildings of burnt brick, every brick like a huge piece of adobe. It is an extensive place, with all conveniences. It has iron gates, at one of which p. 492 is a greengrocer who lives there. The water cisterns are outside it; rounded, the rain water collects in them. However, when I was there it seemed to me to be rather decayed. Kaj was a village on the plateau; it was destroyed, I believe by the Qufs, and its people fled. The roads branch off from there, one of which we have mentioned and in fact traversed, the other going to Qumm, a stage away, p. 493 then another stage to Qaryat al-MajOs (the village of the Magians). Badra has a fortress and farms, and about fifty buildings.
At Ribat ibn Rustam is running water which flows into a cistern within the ribat. Danijl is a large flourishing village. This is the most populated road through the desert, since it is on the borders of al-Jibal. From Karkas Knh to al-Dayr is four farsakhs, thence to Siyah Knh is five.
I did not travel over the road from Naysabnr to Isfahan; however, people tell me that it is very fine and well-traveled, though there are some difficult sands to be encountered. At Ribat Kawran is a fortress in which is a person who takes care of it; outside is a spring, salty, but the people drink of it anyway. At Arazama (Arazama) are three wells, not adequate for large caravans. At al-Mahallabi is a weak spring; here is a ruined ribat.
Ribat ab Shuturan is a place to be feared; it is a place of refuge for al-Kūj (al-Qufs). Here is a canal of middling water which pours out into a pool. The ribat is quite good here, in fact I have not seen a better one in all the countries of the non-Arabs. It is built ofstone and gypsum aftCT the manner ofthe strongholds of Syria, and has iron gates. It is a flourishing place, people being there to take care of it. Ibn Simjūr, commander of the army of the king of al-Mashriq built it. Addition/version MS. c.
... beautifully built in stone, fortified with iron doors. NilSir al-Dawla Abu al-Hasan bin Slmjor built it, and within it a channel of water of middling quality, the main stream of which flows from the mountain, to pour into a pool at the gate of the guardhouse into which the water flows also. I have not seen a guardhouse superior to this one; however, it is a cause of terror, and a shelter for the Kflj, and there is a saying there to the effect that the Koj are always in the guardhouse of A b ShutOriln, for no sooner do they leave it than they are back again; and the people there are always on the alert.
Busht Badham is like a village, for you find everything there. It has extensive farms and flocks of sheep, a copiously flowing canal, and beauties unconcealed; here the traveler finds repose and supplies. Saghand is a thriving populous village. Khazana is a village with a fortress, and farms, both tillage and livestock raising; here are about two hundred people; gardens.
Addition/version MS. c.
Jarmaq is a village with date palms and buildings, beside it two other villages,
401
THE DESERT THAT LIES AMONG THESE REGIONS
the name ofone ofthem being Araba, that ofthe other Biyildhaq. In these places are springs, cultivated fields, livestock, and altogether about two thousand inhabitants. From Busht Bildhilm to Silghand is a fortification in ruin, a distance of one stage; here are mulberry trees and areas surrounded by fruit trees, and but little cultivated. There the Qufs assemble and stand in readiness to block the roads, and they devise their plans of action. I met one man there who cultivated one of those areas I mentioned, and I asked if he did not feel afraid in this place. Said he: “You should know that I traveled to NaysilbOr a number ofyears, and would be there about a month; and I would be dejected, and in fear of the people there until I would return here.” Thence to a puddle of water, then another stage, possibly dry, thence to a rather weak spring, one stage, and here one spring fornicate with a small domed housing. Threefarsakhs further on is a spring from a mountain, then to the end ofthe stage, to Mahilbild, which pertains to Kirmiln. These trails of the lesser roads are unimportant and difficult.
Al-Zawar is a flourishing village, over it a fortress; a stream here that flows from the border ofKirman. At Darknjuwa is a rather weak stream; the place is not well developed.
Shnr Duwazdah is a ribat which has gone to ruin. Here is a wadi in which are trees and palms, but no inhabitant: very dangerous. Dar Bardan is a desolate place; here are wells but no people; further on is a stopping place with a cistern filled by the rains: no one there either. Naband is a ribat, inhabited. Round about is a number of houses, and a stream that turns small mill wheels; it has tillage and date palms.
Addition/version MS. c.
Twofarsakhs before it is a spring of water; here are small palm trees, and domed springs without any people around, and to the right of the stopping place, within shouting distance, stand a great number of palm trees, and grasslands, without buildings; here are the hiding places of al-Qufs. before Naband are date palms, and a well dome, fallen into ruin.
At Biʾr Shak is a well of sweet water; uninhabited. Here is a number of well domes, side by side, and the cisterns are filled to capacity. Daristan is a village with date palms, but by no means flourishing. Nima is a ribat; someone there takes care of it.
At Qaryat Salm are buildings as far as the eye can see, but in ruin. There is not a spring there, not a cistern, not a person; it pertains to Kirman. At Raʾs al-Maʾ is a spring that trickles into a cistern, and waters a farm. Kūkūr is a flourishing village pertaining to Quhistiln. Bira is a small village, with a number of people. At Maʿzal is a spring of water; you see no houses or development there. At Jah Bur is a well, domed, as at Biʾr Shak, also a cistern. There is another Maʿzal, which has domes and a water cistern.
Asfld is counted in the official records as a city of Sijistan, yet it is on the verge of this desert In it are canals and many farms; it is flourishing and populous.
p. 494
D
p. 495
U٧3U؛٧n٩؛soj UO ٩؛BUI pUB ‘suopoe s، ل3؛0؛33 ؛u ٧ا31 SJHJO spaap poos واوو‘ pUB س||
3٩ p٧3A B sounououd IIJM sSpnf sip ‘sunuu؛٧3- M 3UO/U3A3 33B٠d UBIJI UJ؛.. ل333ل3٨ u 3٩ouus sip pUB؛s؛dn 3u؛ ٧اأ3 HIM S3.B3S dn U3S 3٩ ؛M snSuou sip *33B٠d u؛H lJM 3U1033٩؛3٧-BlJ؛M p3U؛ip ةل؛3وءpUB ٧ا31 JO S3JIJ ا٠31. M؛.. 3٩ 3J3tp ؛3U u؟p؛‘SS3U UJ UBip JSAO دا1؛3ا1 ا31 U13U SBAV؛jatUJOJ siq UJ SS |إو3؛ ٧ا31 Xep ٧ا31 IIJM suuajed UBUintj Z٧3A3 3٩؛dn3303٧d Su؛ps ام؛٧بم ٩؛siq quiAi ‘J|3SU1 بم3أم .njasjouiaj ‘p3MO٩ l٠3؛|JJ tuosoq uou ‘ou ‘U3٧p؛uou ‘uuajed uou ‘pU3 ؛sueuipu؛ ٧ا31 33S IIJM no/ jtep u٧؛y؛3u l٠٧؛pUB s3u ٧ا31 snouusuuouu؛ ٧ا31 I.U.B3M ustpe jtep ؛BAB ou JO s؛|‘ SUB uou ٧3٦ اا؛111 ٧n٩ UBIJI sn soj ^Bjd م3 uo 3٥B3S3 Xbui ٧اأ3 jtep ام3 ٧no٩B p3٩SB SUB ٧اأ3 f,.fpp^.fS4aa/tt٠.3 'SW u٠’
٧33UU03 XjOAO pUB (S33U٩؛٧BI3J pUB UO؛٩SUO؛A\ d؛II p3J3A3S 3٩ SB330 snouuauuouu siqu JO jnjJBSj؛uo: ااأ3 cp^ ااأ3 A\ suaqdoud؛uo IJBJ II papu3٩ ااأ3 pory ou sauuoo ot|A\ 3UO سل{بم S؛J33U؛٧^‘ snqu pile sod pvaup siqu dn S3٩B٧؛٧؛(uo p JO؛٧jn3yj؛S3 لح3؛ااأ3ل ااأ3 JOU puoiuj ااأ3 A\ uojuBduuoo uuosoq؛II djaqjo 3٩؛ JUO^ sāuiqu؛ اا31 S3SIU3X3 U3l|A\ ^cp س1لل ٩وBAB OUJO؛pile ،I اا31ل3 \A؛II ٧un0u٧jns ou 3٩؛3u 3٩ ٧no٩B paqsv puB IJBUUS spaap jno ةل3ءأااأ3 ل؛اال3 q٧؛puB s3u ااأ3 ؛lUEUJoduu qSB pUB S po٥؛UBip ^J3J33U لا3 uo ‘sn uo ajqnOJU UOMOqS uou اا31 M 3AS U3l|A\ ^cp؛II س3لل JO ؛٧‘ sudoDDB JO ؛٧ ssAOjddc puB ؛٧- ٧3٦ uuiq ٧n٩ sn UOJ ^vud سل{بم ٩؛pu ؛‘utuaju pory Abuu pt٧v H ou injpuaui 3٩؛sqooj oqw 1UEAJ3S S ؛jno ouu ٩٥٥٩‘ squiqu puB '.iujlj IJ3B3J uou ssop uusip JO
S3A|SS٧nO؛ BlU3J 3U31JU؛p3U‘ 3 *U3A3MO٩؛٧؛JJB uou PIP M S3؛IB 3A* ٧n٩ ٧ا31 U3٩umu M UBip [uj] ---؛ip دا1؛3ا1 ام3 ou pUB ‘S3A|SS٧nO psginooo دا1؛3ا1 ام3 pSUOASp f,.fpp^.S4aa/tt٠!.'D SW u٠
3joj puB uopjcd JOJ؛JOJ (ss3U3a 3٧ ؛snojauaS puB injpuaui s ou Mouq puB puBoq puB J3S3p aqujo ‘punos 3٩؛٧d؛JO uo ااأ3 j٧un03؛qsB 1 S3 po٥ دا1؛8 ؛٧Bl{A\ s JO Mouq 3AS اا31 JO suogiau اا31 UUBJSJ JO UUJB3J؛ \٧Bl|A U33S OABq 3AS
٥ *96	iOANal]
؛Ploo ĀJ3UU3JUX3 s اا31 ٧U3؛JBoX 3J•
V لءلج3 z٠t|N ou UMop SMoy UI ‘UUB3JJS؛sauunooua 3UO puB ‘ug٧s ؛٧ UBIJU 33Bjd B UB u. ااأ3 JO 3٧n.oj ءآلأددA\ usnuu 3UO ipiqM qānojtju UUB3JJS B smooo؛3pt ؛٧‘ ؛A٧xIS s"/؟'OS JO ،sqqtī
^AOjd paau no؛s؛B JOJ suo ؛s JO ^aujno؛s^vp x داأ3 ل3لأةااأ‘ ١١.aunsvauu no^ J3A3J3q UIOUJ ujcdc اأ3ل3ءou P٧BI| 3JE uappoj puB pooj ة3ا Xjjbd ou 3ABI| no^ paapuj ؛٧؛ س3 ٧U3UI؛P3U٥؛ puB ااأ3ل3 uigqpgg uqsng UB asoqu UBtp uatpo ajdoad ou 3UB؛ puB AOjd؛jnp U3i(3qs ap؛3u ااأ3 sjvqu ou puy no^ SUJBU ؛u q٧؛uuasap s S3٩؛asotp S3P 3؛HHVSAVj ۵3٨3 SUU3٧S ٧بمولو ؛3 B s؛pauuop B JO UJ3٧S س3للا س1{بم ou aunuonuus JO saScjs M3J Xjoa ااأ3 saunoj س3 |3ABI ٧U3U٧؛M 3JE P3U٥؛٧noq٧ pauuop SuiABq Itraqu uo UOUBMJO soomos puB S٧U3U٧3I„3S ااأ3 ٩oo٩ pjnow ٧3U3I ^jauaui 3٩}'P3U31 uo uuasap اا31 spcoj س3 ٧U3UU OABq؛USJI ou 3U3M 3M JI 'p3U٥ اا31 spcoj UOUJUU س1{بم اا31 داأ3 Suiobouoj ؛s سا،ءل؛٧no٩B UMOuq s ااأ3 ddo٧s snouuBj؛sooBjd 3u ؛u ٧}t؛s
zot
SN0IO3H 3HL JO 3D٥3٦MON^ د0لا SNOISIAia Lsaa 3HL
403
THE DESERT THAT LIES AMONG THESE REGIONS
obtain there what he has already prepared for the day of his resurrection. May God render us, and the eminent shaykh, the magnificent and most excellent nobleman, among those who “shall have no fear, nor shall they grieve!” (Qurʾān, sOra 2, v. 38).
Pc Finitur MS. B] p. 497 Said the author in his farewell:
A book is like jewels, and like the spring time,
Like carnelians, and fertile gardens;
Thus, therein is an account of the earth in its entirety,
And in a special manner, hence is it called beautiful:
It mentions the regions of the countries and of all the earth,
And all the islands brilliant like the dawn;
The mountain passes of the countries, of ʿAdan and Sham,
And of Sns al-Gharb, in a lofty account;
Its springs and streams in the deserts,
And the impassable mountains of the world,
And the fruits of the regions in addition to the palm trees,
With the strange occupations everywhere.
Some of it I saw myself, and explored
Until I was fatigued, from days of travel after nights;
Some of it I based on the authority of others, mentioning the ascription: Derived from al-Shaʿbl or Waklʿ.
I mentioned the magnificence of the various metropoles,
And all the cities brilliant like the dawn.
I distinguished among the seas by virtue of my knowledge
And experience, as the herdsman distinguishes the sheep in the flock;
And the languages of the peoples, nation by nation And the dialects of the Arabs, from barbarpus speech.
Also the merchandise of every region, and of the world,
The condition of the slaves, and the trading of them.
Here are examples of problems of every region,
And people dealing with them to the best of their capability.
So the reader can thus see the marvels of creation And all the varied coloured ornamentation on the earth;
So that man knows truly the greatness of the Creator And the magnificent work of the Almighty, the All-Hearing;
Hence he can worship Him as a true devotee in submission,
As an obedient servant of God.
p. 498 Thus may he propagate the works of the generous hands of the Merciful God everywhere,
He who manifests permanence to the preeminent of mankind;
404 THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS Because spreading of the goodness grows up Until it reaches the merciful God from the one who spreads it.
I have written with much thought in which I did my best,
Seeking eternal life on the dreadful day of judgment,
And forgiveness of my sins, by the kindness of my Lord;
And from hellfire, and grievous dismay.
So take wisdom, like pearls in its beauty,
0 Abu Hasan, vizier of Ibn al-Rafiʿ!
Sacred [Muqaddasa] it shines like the sparkle Of sapphire, familiar to the most select.
It is finished; and praise be to God alone.
Addition/version MS. C
Said the copyist: I completed the copying of this work, praise be to God for the gracious success He has granted, at the beginning of the blessed month of Rajab [seventh month of the Muslim year] in the year 658/1259. Al-Hasan bin Ahmad bin Mahmod bin al-Kamal edited it, praising God, worshipping Him, and seeking His forgiveness.
D
p. 498
APPENDIX:
ENGLISH KEYS TO THE ARABIC MAPS
Map 1: The Persian Sea (see p. 10).
From MS. Sprenger 5—Ahlwardt 6034 by kind permission of the Staatsbibliothek
Preussischer Kulturbesitz, Berlin, Orientabteilung.
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
406
Map II: Bahr al-ROm (see p. 14).
From MS. Sprenger 5-Ahlwardt 6034 by kind permission of the Staatsbibliothek
Preussischer Kulturbesitz, Berlin, Orientabteilung.
407
APPENDIX: ENGLISH KEYS TO THE ARABIC MAPS
Map ni؛ Al-KaCba (see p. 54).
From MS. Sprenger 5-Ahlwardt 6034 by kind permission of the Staatsbibliothek
Preussischer Kulturbesitz, Berlin, Orientabteilung.
ssn3J٥؟uqjag ‘zjjsaqjnqn^ J3qos‘ j٠؟iu9؟9iq؟٠3un١ ي٠لس sn §سلاة٠ل ج-jpj٩qv و0ع٢ي q^ ٩؟uij3d pu؟ss؟is aqijo U0؟؟qsi؟١q؟٩3qio dm !٨: ٠d dds) BiqBJV وع).
I
SN0I033 لاHL AO 30٥3٦^0N^ د0لا SNOISIAIO ISAH AHl
ssn3j٥؛9 ‘zijsoqjnqn^ j3qosولا؛لا‘ 0ل؛ول٩٠لو؛ائ٠ ل؛،ل0س q \r£Q9 ipjBAqqv—s JoSuoidg .SPY^ ٩؛0 uojssjuuod puللااوis؟؟qsj؛٩3qjoqq dejv ٨: ٥3S) bejfciV 96 ■d)-
e٨٨isip?D-|v
SdV^ oiav^v 3HL OL SA3)I HS!٦ON3 :XION3ddV
60۶
AlJanUb
ssn3j٥؟S3٩jniin^ J3qos؟iJ3g ‘zi؟JO ،u؟iu3؟٠Sunp3i٩ قل0لاا٠sw K09 ipJBMiqv—s jaSuajdg ٩^ ٩؟0 uoissiuuad puوااأوs؟؟٩sj؟٩3qjoq٩ dBJAT ٨ل: ٠d aas) BJIZBf.IV 911).
و01
3 لا0103لآةHL AO 3003٦MON^ د0لا SNOISIAia LS3H 3HL
uqjog ‘zjjsoqjnqn^ JoqosjssnoJd‘ j٥؛iuo؟3iq؛؛٠Sun
قل0للأ٩K09 ipjBMiHVi JoSuojdg I؛0 uojssjuuod puواااوis؟؟qsi؛q؛؛٩oqio dm ٥٥s) uilMSiV :11٨ ٠٥ in)
SdV^ oiav^v 3HL OL sxn HS!٦ON3 XION3ddV
lit
Map VIII: Misr (see p. lM).
From MS. Sprenger 5—Ahlwardt 6034 by kind pemission of the Staatsbibliothek Preussischer Kulturbesitz, Berlin, Orientabteilung.
THE BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
413
APPENDIX: ENGLISH KEYS TO THE ARABIC MAPS
Map IX: AlMaghrib (see p. 184).
From MS. Sprenger 5-Ahlwardt 6034 by kind permission of the Staatsbibliothek
Preussischer Kulturbesitz, Berlin, Orientabteilung.
Balad al.Sūdān — — - — —	— Surat al.Wāhāt
JdqosissndJd ؛{0 ‘zjisaqjminوللالأ، JO؟lu3؟٠np31٩
يل09 ipJBAqqvi JaSuajdg .SIV UIOع٢ي ٩^ ٩؟iqiqspis aqx JO uoissiuuad pu؟3Rlo ٠d 99S) }JdSdQ UBiqBJV dqi :X dm ة8٠)ا
tit
3 لا0103لآةHL AO 3003٦^0N^ د0لا SNOISIAia LS3H 3HL
ssn3J٥؟S3٩jniin^ J3qos؟Sunipiqepuo ‘uqjag ‘zi■
كل0لااipjBAqqv—s J9Su3jd§ sn و٠ع۶ ٩^ ٩؟0 uoissiuuad puوااأو٩sids؟٩3qioq٩
jqBN-iB bcbjbm m IX dm (؟وو٠d ££٠)٠
|(ءرا8ءععا
n؟M٥٠٠
0؛دا٠٠ب
e.i.pu^i
اءاعإ.
٠H"IV؛8٠
SdV^ oiav^v 3HL OL SA3)I HS!٦ON3 :XION3ddV

JayhCin
ssn3J٥؛S3٩٧ni١n^ J3٩3s؛zl‘ لأ3لا؛لا‘ ٧0؛3٧٩B٧U3؛|Sun s JoSuaudg •gw UIOJJ-Aq 19 ipjeM٠٩٧ ٩؛ui٧3d pu؛ss؛٩siee٧s atp JO uo؛j٩؛٩3t٠io im d aas) uESgjmra :try di
u?s?jniix-.*
ipeqy usujqeg
ثم
\jtpnpnH ٧آءبص

b;jL|sew-|v
9H
SNOIO'J* AHl AO dOOTIMONN د0لا SNOISIAia LS3H 3HL
417
APPENDIX: ENGLISH KEYS TO THE ARABIC MAPS
Al-Mashriq
Al-Shamiil
Map XIII: Tabar Daylam (see p. 288).
From MS. Sprenger 5-Ahlwardt 6034 by kind permission of the Staatsbibliothek
Preussischer Kulturbesitz, Berlin, Orientabteilung.
ssn3J٥؟JO ‘uqjag ‘zjjsaqjnqn^ J3qos؟ju؟3q؟٠3un١ يدس ٠sw 09 ipjBAViHV—s J33u3Jdsع۶ q^ ٩؟0 uojssjuuad puو is dqx؟؟qsi؟١q؟٩3qio tr٩jm١pY :aix df^؛٠d *as) UB toe)
□
ج؟ل٠ا٧للااا٧إ٠٨ I,e٨٨-٧؟uefAeqjeMpyeM U
8H
SN0I033 لاHL AO 30٥3٦MON^ د0لا SNOISIAia LS3H 3HL
419
APPENDIX: ENGLISH KEYS TO THE ARABIC MAPS
Al-Mashriq
Al-Shamiil
AlJanUb
Khiizistiin
Hulwan Al-٠l٢a٩
Map XV: jiblll al-Daylam (see p. 314).
From MS. Sprenger 5—Ahlwardt 6034 by kind permission of the Staatsbibliothek
Preussischer Kulturbesitz, Berlin, Orientabteilung.
420	THF. BEST DIVISIONS FOR KNOWLEDGE OF THE REGIONS
AI-Basra
Map XVI: KhGzistan (see p. 331).
From MS. Sprenger 5-Ahlwardt 6034 by kind permission ofthe Staatsbibliothek
Preussischer Kulturbesitz, Berlin, Orientabteilung.
TukhUm Fārs
ssn3J٥؟S3٩jniin^ J3qos؟9 ‘ziولا؟لا‘ JO؟lu3؟3l٩؛٠Suni قل0لاا ٠sw 5سلاقول 09 jpj.iqv-sع٢ي ٩^ ٩؟tuj3d pu؟ss؟0 U0وأو iqiqspig؟3Rlo ٠d 90S) SJ*Ā :IIAX d*w sw)"
٦ON3 :XION3ddV!3HL OL SĀ3N HS ٧لا019٧ ^SdV

Al-Jībāl ------	----- KhUzistan
ssn3J٥؟S3٩jniin^ J3qos؟Sunipiqwiau() ‘uqjag ‘zi قل0لاا ٠sw 09 ipJBAqqvi JaSuaidgع٢ي ٩^ ٩؟0 uoissiuuad puو iqiqsiBBis dqx؟3RI0 aas) uyuutM :،HAY df ٠٥ عئع)٠
-------------------------٧|-JB٨؟BZ
3 لا0103لآةHL AO 39a3IMON)I د0لا SNOISIAia LS3H 3HL	ZZf
HudUd Kirman -
423
APPENDIX: ENGLISH KEYS TO THE ARABIC MAPS
Map XIX: Al.Sind (seep. 385).
From MS. Sprenger 5—Ahlwardt 6034 by kind permission of the Staatsbibliothek
Preussischer Kulturbesitz, Berlin, Orientabteilung.
I.IBS3IS1؟13، ui۵ins؟u؟^3 ^qdnin؟S3u؟ inquEisj ‘n^nijqpnw‘ ٠IU \L6Z ‘bXjosbXv UIOJJ ٩^ ٩؟tuj3d pu؟ss؟iB٩BqsBg٠3٠jjo U0!، لاا؟لةا؟ل XX df؛ داأ3 SJ3٥؛d 33S) UJ3S3Q UB• £.(s٥
leqiriv
جأ؛أةل؟لآ
ugj^eifij
SNOIOAH 3HL AO 30Q3'I^0N^ د0لا SNOISIAia 1S39 3HL
Kirmān--------	. — -Fare
INDEX
؛ikbaj	m
sunna [pl. sunan]	72, 222
takblr , tafebtra	37,82
tttlhjai	٦\
tarllBtfh [pl. oftarinfha]	85
tashriq 38
taillm, taillma	37,232
taina[ 66 tayammun	37
toylasan	6
henaa	٦٠
w
wajA ٠ .دajiba،٦	١2
muqf 128,289 witr	37
jihad 267 jubba 339 ol-KHidhr	u
thutba 88,201 kisiJ> 154 M
madhhab ؟ا\. madhah١b١	34
maAdf 35,240
mana 123
mann 295
maulln 67
ma٠٥ra 73
marhala 89
mihrab 44
minbar 23, 163
m?i٥r ti. ا. iz٥r١ 267
muadhdhin	106
muhtasib 85
mtjiahid 35
musalla 70
mut'a 37
ī
:	336
i 37
o
A
adhlln 82 ajrtsha	29٠,299
ahl al-hadith 35 ansllr 63
aqbiya [pl. of qabiJ>, q. V.]	264
ashab hadtth ١4 ahl al^adtth
(asfda	41
arid،،	2آ
baysar 154
،laH	m
dlanaq 85
do.	84
dirham; weight 84, 145, 152 dhimma 39 iikqan	227
d١٠#a	6
F
farlidh لآ. of foaridha ١.لآ.ا faridha	72
farsakh	2
fiqh 246
37٦	ه٠٠ااة
H		qabiJ>	264
hadtth	219	،pbla	35, 128
hartsa	37, 252	qist 144	
ha۶ala	37	qubbayt	152
		quhandiz 103	
I		س„»ا	37
ihram	70		
imam	106	R	
iqama	196	rata‘	196
izlJr	85	ri4iJ>	339
ل		rustaq	23
jarib	111, 366	s	
jam,’( [pl.ja٠>ami٩ 41		sharia	222
CENTER FOR MUSLIM CONTRIBUTION TO CIVILIZATION
The Center for Muslim Contribution to Civilization, a non-government, non-profit making cultural organization, strives to lead Muslims and non-Muslims alike to a better understanding of the Muslim contribution to civilization and to a better knowledge of Islam.
Located in Doha, State of Qatar, the Center has the warm support of its patron, the Emir of Qatar, H.H. Sheikh Hamad Bin Khalifa AI-Thani. Presenting accurate translations of some of the best known works of the most eminent Muslim savants, spanning the 800 years of the classical period of Islamic civilization (c. 620 AD to c. 1500 AD), since its establishment in 1983 the Center has produced nine volumes covering five major works in different fields of knowledge.
For further information on the work of the Center, all correspondence should be directed to The General Supervisor Center for Muslim Contribution to Civilization P.O. Box 327 Doha
State of Qatar Arabian Gulf